皇甫嵩字义真，安定朝那人，度辽将军规之兄子也。
皇甫嵩字义真，是安定郡朝那县人，是度辽将军皇甫规的哥哥的儿子。
Huangfu Song, style named Yizhen, was a native of Chaona District in Anding Commandery and the nephew of General of Crossing Liao, Huangfu Gui.

父节，雁门太守。
他的父亲皇甫节，曾任雁门太守。
His father, Huangfu Jie, served as Governor of Yanmen.

嵩少有文武志介，好诗书，习弓马。
皇甫嵩年轻时文武兼备，志操耿介，喜爱《诗》《书》，并熟练射箭骑马。
When young, Huangfu Song was skilled in both civil and military arts, upright in conduct, fond of the Book of Songs and the Book of Documents, and skilled in archery and horsemanship.

初举孝廉、茂才，太尉陈蕃、大将军窦武连辟，并不到。
他起初被举为孝廉、茂才，太尉陈蕃和大将军窦武先后征召他，但他都没有前往。
He was first recommended as a Filial and Incorrupt as well as a Cultivated Talent; both Defender-in-chief Chen Fan and Grand General Dou Wu summoned him, but he did not respond.

灵帝公车征为议郎，迁北地太守。
后来灵帝用公车征召他为议郎，又升任北地太守。
Emperor Ling later sent an imperial carriage to summon him as Court Gentleman for Consultation, then promoted him to Governor of Beidi.

初，钜鹿张角，自称大贤良师，奉事黄老道，畜养弟子，跪拜首过、符水呪说以疗病。
早先，钜鹿人张角自称“大贤良师”，奉行黄老之道，收养许多弟子，用跪拜认错、符水咒语的方法治病。
Earlier on, Zhang Jiao from Julu called himself “Grand Sagacious Master.” He worshipped the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, gathered many disciples, and used confession and magic water incantations to cure illnesses.

病者颇愈，百姓信向之。
病人多有痊愈，百姓于是信奉他。
Many who were ill recovered, and the common people came to believe in him.

角因遣弟子八人，使于四方，以善道教化天下，转相诳惑。
于是张角派出八位弟子前往四方，用所谓善道教化天下，互相欺骗迷惑。
Zhang Jiao then sent eight disciples to various regions to preach his “good way” and thereby delude and confuse the people.

十余年间，众徒数十万，连结郡国。
十多年间，他的门徒已达数十万，互相勾连各郡各国。
Within more than ten years, his followers numbered in the hundreds of thousands and connected across many commanderies.

自青、徐、幽、冀、荆、扬、兖、豫。
从青、徐、幽、冀、荆、扬、兖、豫八州都有人响应。
From Qing, Xu, You, Ji, Jing, Yang, Yan, and Yu provinces, people all followed his teachings.

徐、幽、冀、荆、扬、兖、豫八州之人，莫不毕应。
青、徐、幽、冀、荆、扬、兖、豫八州的百姓都响应他。
The people of the eight provinces—Qing, Xu, You, Ji, Jing, Yang, Yan, and Yu—all responded to him.

遂置三十六方，方犹将军号也。
于是设置三十六个“方”，其地位相当于将军的称号。
He accordingly set up thirty-six “Fang,” a title roughly equivalent to that of a general.

大方万余人，小方六七千，各立渠帅。
大的方有一万多人，小的方有六七千人，各自立渠帅为首。
A large Fang had over ten thousand members, while a small Fang had six to seven thousand, each led by its own commander.

讹言“苍天已死，黄天当立，岁在甲子，天下大吉”。
他们散布谣言说：“苍天已死，黄天当立，岁在甲子，天下大吉。”
They spread the rumor: “The Blue Heaven is dead, the Yellow Heaven shall rise; in the year Jiazi, all under Heaven will prosper.”

以白土书京城寺门及州郡官府，皆作“甲子”字。
他们用白土在京城寺门和州郡官府上写下‘甲子’二字。
They wrote the characters “Jiazi” with white clay on the gates of temples and government offices throughout the capital and provinces.

中平元年，大方马元义等先收荆、扬数万人，期会发于邺。
中平元年，大方首领马元义等人先召集荆州、扬州数万人，约定在邺同时起兵。
In the first year of the Zhongping era, Ma Yuanyi and others from a large Fang gathered tens of thousands from Jing and Yang provinces and agreed to rise together at Ye.

元义数往来京师，以中常侍封请、徐奉等为内应，约以三月五日，内外俱起。
马元义多次往来京师，与中常侍封请、徐奉等人勾结为内应，约定三月五日里应外合同时起事。
Ma Yuanyi frequently traveled to the capital and colluded with Palace Attendants Feng Xu and Xu Feng as inside agents, agreeing to coordinate an uprising on the fifth day of the third month.

未及作乱，而张角弟子济南唐周上书告之。
尚未发动叛乱时，张角弟子济南人唐周上书揭发了他们。
Before the rebellion began, Tang Zhou of Jinan, one of Zhang Jiao’s disciples, reported the plot in a memorial to the throne.

于是车裂元义于洛阳。
于是马元义被押赴洛阳处以车裂之刑。
Consequently, Ma Yuanyi was executed in Luoyang by being torn apart by chariots.

灵帝以周章下三公、司隶，使钩盾令周斌将三府掾属案验宫省直卫及百姓有事角道者，诛杀千余人。
灵帝将唐周的奏章下发给三公与司隶，命钩盾令周斌率领三府官属调查宫中卫士及百姓中信奉张角道的人，诛杀了一千多人。
Emperor Ling passed Tang Zhou’s report to the Three Dukes and the Metropolitan Commandant, ordering District Magistrate Zhou Bin to lead the officials of the Three Offices in investigating palace guards and civilians involved in Zhang Jiao’s sect, resulting in over a thousand executions.

推考冀州，逐捕角等。
又命冀州官员审讯追捕张角等人。
He further ordered officials in Jizhou to interrogate and pursue Zhang Jiao and his followers.

角等知事已露，晨夜驰敕诸方，一时俱起。
张角等人知道事情败露，日夜火速命令各个方，一时共同起兵。
Zhang Jue and his followers realized that their plot had been exposed, so he hurriedly sent orders to all the Fang divisions to rise up at once.

皆着黄巾为膘帜，时人谓之“黄巾”，亦名为“蛾贼”。
都穿着黄巾作为标志，当时人称他们为“黄巾”，也叫“蛾贼”。
They all wore yellow turbans as their emblem; people at the time called them the “Yellow Turbans,” and they were also known as the “Moth Bandits.”

杀人以祠天，角称天公将军，角弟宝称地公将军，宝弟梁称人公将军。
他们杀人祭天，张角自称“天公将军”，弟弟张宝称“地公将军”，张宝的弟弟张梁称“人公将军”。
They killed people to worship Heaven. Zhang Jue called himself “General of Heaven,” his brother Zhang Bao “General of Earth,” and Zhang Liang “General of Man.”

所在燔烧官府、劫略聚邑，州郡失据，长吏多逃亡。
他们所到之处焚烧官府，抢掠城邑，州郡都陷落，官吏大多逃亡。
Wherever they went, they burned down government offices, plundered towns and villages, causing prefectures and commanderies to lose control as most officials fled.

旬日之间，天下响应，京师震动。
十来天之间，天下响应，京师震动。
Within ten days, the entire realm responded to the uprising, and the capital was thrown into turmoil.

诏敕州郡修理攻守，简练器械，自函谷、大谷、广城、伊阙、辗辕、旋门、孟津、小平津诸关，并置都尉。
皇帝下诏命令州郡修筑防御工事，整备武器，在函谷、大谷、广城、伊阙、辗辕、旋门、孟津、小平津等关隘都设置都尉。
The emperor issued an edict ordering all commanderies to fortify defenses, prepare weapons, and establish command posts at passes such as Hangu, Dagu, Guangcheng, Yique, Zhanyuan, Xuanmen, Mengjin, and Xiaopingjin.

召群臣会议。嵩以为宜解党禁，益出中藏钱、西园厩马，以班军士。帝从之。
皇帝召集群臣商议。皇甫嵩建议解除党锢，动用宫中钱财和西园马匹，分发给军士。皇帝听从了他的意见。
The emperor summoned the ministers to discuss strategy. Huangfu Song advised lifting the political bans and using imperial funds and Western Garden horses to reward soldiers. The emperor accepted the proposal.

于是发天下精兵，博选将帅，以嵩为左中郎将，持节，与右中郎将朱儒共发五校、三河骑士及募精勇，合四万余人。
于是征发天下精兵，广泛选拔将领，任命皇甫嵩为左中郎将，授符节，与右中郎将朱儒共同调发五校、三河骑士及募兵，共四万余人。
He then conscripted elite troops from across the empire and appointed capable generals. Huangfu Song was made Left General of the Court Gentlemen and given an imperial tally. Together with Right General Zhu Jun, he mobilized five regiments, Three Rivers cavalry, and recruited soldiers, totaling over forty thousand men.

嵩、儒各统一军，共讨颍川黄巾。
皇甫嵩、朱儒各自统领一军，共同讨伐颍川黄巾军。
Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun each commanded an army and jointly attacked the Yellow Turbans in Yingchuan Commandery.

儒前与贼波才战，战败。嵩因进保长社。
朱儒先与黄巾军首领波才交战，战败；皇甫嵩于是退入长社坚守。
Zhu Jun engaged Bo Cai, a Yellow Turban leader, in battle but was defeated; Huangfu Song then advanced to defend the city of Changshe.

波才引大众围城，嵩兵少，军中皆恐。乃召军吏谓曰：“兵有奇变，不在众寡。今贼依草结营，易为风火。若因夜纵烧，必大惊乱。吾出兵击之，四面俱合，田单之功可成也。”
波才率领大部队包围长社城，皇甫嵩兵少，战士们都很惊慌，皇甫嵩召来军官对他们说：“打仗靠出奇制胜，不在于人数。现在贼寇依草地驻扎，起风易燃。若夜间放火，他们必定惊乱。我再出兵四面合击，功业可如田单。”
The soldiers were all fearful. Huangfu Song then summoned his officers and said, “Victory in battle depends on strategy, not numbers. The enemy is camped on grassy fields, easily flammable. If we set fire at night, they will panic. If I attack and encircle them from all sides, an achievement like Tian Dan’s can be accomplished.”

其夕，遂大风，嵩乃约敕军士，皆束苣乘城，使锐士间出围外，纵火大呼，城上举燎应之。嵩因鼓而奔其陈，贼惊乱奔走。
当天夜里起大风，皇甫嵩命令军士拿火把上城，派精锐士兵暗中出城包围敌人，纵火高呼，城上举火呼应。嵩趁鼓声冲击敌营，黄巾军惊乱逃走。
That night, a strong wind arose. Huangfu Song ordered the soldiers to hold torches on the city walls and sent elite troops to secretly surround the enemy outside. They set fires and shouted, while the soldiers on the wall responded with torches. Huangfu Song then charged the enemy camps with the sound of drums, causing the Yellow Turbans to flee in panic.

会帝遣骑都尉曹操将兵适至，嵩、操与朱億合兵更战，大破之，斩首数万级。封嵩都乡侯。
恰好此时，皇帝遣骑都尉曹操率兵到达，皇甫嵩、曹操与朱儒会师再战，大破敌军，斩首数万。皇帝封皇甫嵩为都乡侯。
At that moment, the emperor sent Cavalry Commandant Cao Cao with troops to arrive. Huangfu Song, Cao Cao, and Zhu Jun joined forces and fought again, achieving a great victory and beheading tens of thousands. The emperor ennobled Huangfu Song as Chief Township Marquis.

嵩、億乘胜进讨汝南、陈国黄巾，追波才于阳翟，击彭脱于西华，并破之。余贼降散，三郡悉平。又进击东郡黄巾卜己于仓亭，生禽卜己，斩首七千余级。
皇甫嵩、朱儒乘胜进攻汝南、陈国的黄巾军，追击波才于阳翟，击败彭脱于西华，全部破之。剩余敌人投降逃散，三郡平定。又进攻东郡黄巾卜己于仓亭，生擒卜己，斩首七千余人。
Riding the momentum of their victory, Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun attacked the Yellow Turbans in Runan and Chenguo, pursued Bo Cai in Yangzhai, and defeated Peng Tuo in Xihua. The remaining rebels surrendered or scattered, and the three commanderies were pacified. They then attacked Bu Ji’s Eastern Section Yellow Turbans at Cangting, capturing Bu Ji alive and beheading over seven thousand.


时北中郎将卢植及东中郎将董卓讨张角，并无功而还，乃诏嵩进兵讨之。
当时北中郎将卢植以及东中郎将董卓讨伐张角，都无功而返，于是皇帝下诏命令皇甫嵩进兵讨伐。
At that time, the Leader of the Northern Section of Court Gentlemen Lu Zhi and the Leader of the Eastern Section of Court Gentlemen Dong Zhuo attacked Zhang Jiao, but they returned home in vain. The emperor then issued an edict ordering Huangfu Song to march against Zhang Jiao.

嵩与角弟梁战于广宗。梁众精勇，嵩不能克。
皇甫嵩与张角的弟弟张梁在广宗开战。张梁部队精锐勇猛，皇甫嵩未能取胜。
Huangfu Song fought Zhang Jiao’s younger brother Zhang Liang at Guangzong. Because Zhang Liang’s troops were elite and powerful, Huangfu Song did not prevail.

明日，乃闭营休士，以观其变。知贼意稍懈，乃潜夜勒兵，鸡鸣驰赴其陈，战至晡时，大破之。
第二天，皇甫嵩关闭营垒让士兵休息，以静观敌人的动静。了解到敌人军心逐渐懈怠，暗中在夜里招集士兵，在后半夜快速进攻敌人，一直战斗到黎明，大败敌军。
The next day, Huangfu Song closed the barracks to let soldiers rest and observed the enemy’s movements. Realizing the enemy soldiers were growing lax, he secretly gathered soldiers at night and launched a sudden attack after midnight, fighting until dawn and defeating them.

斩梁，获首三万级，赴河死者五万许人，焚烧车重三万余两。悉虏其妇子，系获甚众。
斩杀了张梁，杀了三万人，逃入河里淹死者五万余人，焚烧战车辎重三万余辆，全部俘获他们的妇女小孩，抓获的敌人很多。
He killed Zhang Liang and thirty thousand soldiers; fifty thousand more fled but drowned in the river. Over thirty thousand chariots and supplies were burned. He captured their women and children, with many prisoners.

角先已病死，乃剖棺戮尸，传首京师。
张角此前已经病死，于是开棺戮尸，把他的头送到京师。
Some time earlier, Zhang Jiao had already died of illness, so his coffin was opened, his corpse executed, and his head sent to the capital.

嵩复与钜鹿太守冯翊郭典攻角弟宝于下曲阳，又斩之。
皇甫嵩又与钜鹿太守冯翊、郭典进攻下曲阳县的张角弟张宝，又斩杀了他。
Huangfu Song, joined by Feng Yi and Guo Dian, attacked Zhang Bao at Xiaquyang District and killed him.

首获十余万人，筑京观于城南。
杀了十多万人，把尸体堆积在城南，称为“京观”。
Several hundred thousand people were killed, and their corpses were piled south of the city. It was called “Jingguan.”

即拜嵩为左车骑将军，领冀州牧，封槐里侯，食槐里、美阳两县合八千户。
朝廷即刻授予皇甫嵩左车骑将军之职，兼任冀州牧，封为槐里侯，享受槐里、美阳两县一共八千户的租税。
The emperor immediately appointed Huangfu Song as Left General of Chariot and Horse and concurrently as Inspector of Jizhou, granting him the title of Marquis of Huaili with a fief of eight thousand households from Huaili and Meiyang.

以黄巾既平，故改年为中平。
因为黄巾军已经平定，所以改年号为中平。
Because the Yellow Turbans Uprising was pacified, the emperor changed the reign title to Zhongping.


嵩奏请冀州一年田租以赡饥民，帝从之。
皇甫嵩上奏请求给他冀州一年的田租，以周济饥民，皇帝听从了他的建议。
Huangfu Song petitioned for a year's land rent from Jizhou to relieve the starving, and the emperor approved.

百姓歌曰：“天下大乱兮市为墟，母不保子兮妻失夫，赖得皇甫兮复安居。”
百姓歌颂说：“天下大乱啊，集市成为荒地，母亲不能养育儿子，妻子失去丈夫，全靠皇甫嵩，我们重新安居乐业。”
The people sang, "The world was in chaos and the markets lie desolate, mothers cannot raise their sons and wives have lost their husbands; thanks to Huangfu Song we can live in peace again."

嵩温恤士卒，甚得众情。
皇甫嵩体恤士兵，很得军心。
Huangfu Song treated his soldiers with kindness and thus won their hearts.

每军行顿止，须营幔修立，然后就舍帐，军士皆食，己乃尝饭。
每次行军途中住宿休息，要等整个部队的营帐全部搭完然后他才进自己的帐子，将士们都吃了，他自己才吃饭。
Whenever the army halted, he waited until the camp tents were all set up before entering his own tent, and he did not eat until all the soldiers had eaten.

吏有因事受赂者，嵩更以钱物赐之，吏怀惭，或至自杀。
军官中有因某事受人贿赂的，皇甫嵩又以钱物赐给他们，使这些人感到惭愧，甚至有的自杀。
When officers accepted bribes for favors, Huangfu Song would give them money and goods, causing them shame and driving some to suicide.

嵩既破黄巾，威震天下，而朝政日乱，海内虚困，故信都令汉阳阎忠干说嵩曰。
皇甫嵩平定黄巾后，声威震动天下，但朝政日渐混乱，国力民生困顿，因此信都县令汉阳人阎忠冒昧进言于嵩。
After Huangfu Song crushed the Yellow Turbans and his fame spread across the realm, the court grew ever more chaotic and the country suffered, so Yan Zhong, the magistrate of Xindu from Hanyang, boldly spoke to him.

昔韩信不忍一餐之遇，而弃三分之业，利剑已揣其喉，方发悔毒之叹者，机失而谋乖也。
以前韩信不忍忘记一顿饭的恩遇，却放弃得天下三分的业绩，直到利剑已至喉间才发出悔恨之叹，说明机会一失谋略便错过了。
In the past Han Xin, unable to betray the small kindness of a meal, abandoned the chance to possess one third of the realm; only when the sword was at his throat did he bitterly regret it, showing that a lost opportunity means plans go awry.

今主上势弱于刘项，将军权重于淮阴，指足以振风云，叱咤可以兴雷电。
现在天子之势不如刘邦项羽，将军之权重胜过淮阴，挥旗指挥即可震动风云，一声喝令足以兴起雷霆。
Now the sovereign's power is weaker than that of Liu and Xiang, while General your authority surpasses Han Xin's; with your command you can stir the winds and clouds and by shouting summon thunder and lightning.

移宝器于将兴，推亡汉于已坠，实神机之至会，风发之良时也。
乘此良机，移动宝器以兴将祚，推翻汉室正是天赐良机，时机已至。
Seize the moment and transfer the imperial treasures to establish a ruler; overthrowing the Han is truly the opportune moment when fate and circumstances favor action.

且今竖宦群居，同恶如市，上命不行，权归近习。
况且当今宦官聚党营私，奸恶成市，皇帝的命令不得施行，权力归于近侍亲信。
Moreover, the eunuchs now clump together and do evil as in a market, imperial orders go unheeded and power has passed to the emperor's favorites.

昏主之下，难以久居，功劳太大，奸臣就会痛恨你。
在昏庸君主之下难以久居，若功劳太大，奸臣便必然仇视你。
Under a foolish ruler one cannot remain safe long; if your merits grow too great, treacherous ministers will hate you.


不赏之功，谗人侧目，如不早图，后悔无及！
如果不及早图谋，后悔也来不及。
If one does not plan early, it will be too late for regret.

嵩惧曰：“非常之谋，不施于有常之势；创图大功，岂庸才所致？
皇甫嵩一听，很害怕，说：“非同寻常的谋划，不能在正常的形势下施行。图谋创立大功，不是庸才可以达到的。
Huangfu Song, frightened, said, "This is an extraordinary plan that cannot be executed under ordinary circumstances; achieving great feats is beyond the ability of a mediocre person.

黄巾细孽，敌非秦、项，新结易散，难以济业。
黄巾不过是小寇，不是秦朝、项羽那样的强敌，刚刚聚集容易遣散，难以成就大业。
The Yellow Turbans are minor bandits, not powerful enemies like Qin or Xiang Yu; they gather and disperse easily, making it difficult to accomplish great undertakings.

且人未忘主，天不佑逆。
况且民心向着皇帝，天不会保佑叛逆的人。
Moreover, the people's hearts are loyal to the emperor, and Heaven does not protect traitors.

若虚造不冀之功，以速朝夕之祸，孰与委忠本朝，守其臣节？
如果幻想创造这种荒诞的功业，以招致意外灾祸，何如效忠本朝，守臣子之节？
If I were to fabricate undeserved achievements, inviting sudden calamity, would it not be better to remain loyal to the dynasty and uphold a subject's integrity?

虽云多谗，不过放废，‘犹有令名，死且不朽’。
即使被很多人中伤，不过是被革去职务，美好的名声还在，死了也将不朽。
Even if slandered by many, the worst is dismissal; one's good reputation remains and will endure even after death.

反常之论，所不敢闻。
你这种违反常道的话，是我不愿意听的。
Your talk, contrary to the proper way, is something I dare not heed.

忠知计不用，因亡去。
阎忠知道自己的计谋在皇甫嵩身上行不通，于是逃走了。
Yan Zhong realized his plan could not work on Huangfu Song, so he fled.

会边章、韩遂作乱陇右，明年春，诏嵩回镇长安，以卫园陵。
这时，边章、韩遂在陇右作乱，第二年春天，皇帝下诏命皇甫嵩镇守长安，以保卫祖宗园陵。
At this time, Bian Zhang and Han Sui caused unrest in Longyou; in the spring of the following year, the emperor ordered Huangfu Song to guard Chang’an to protect the imperial tombs.

章等遂复入寇三辅，使嵩因讨之。
边章等于是又侵犯三辅地区，朝廷派皇甫嵩讨伐他们。
Bian Zhang and others invaded the Three Metropolis Areas again, so the court sent Huangfu Song to attack them.

初，嵩讨张角，路由邺，见中常侍赵忠的住宅超越规制，于是上奏没收。
早先时候，皇甫嵩讨伐张角，经过邺，看到中常侍赵忠的住宅超越规制，于是上奏没收。
Earlier, when Huangfu Song fought Zhang Jiao, he passed by Ye and saw that Palace Attendant Zhao Zhong's residence exceeded regulations, so he reported it and confiscated it.


侍赵忠舍宅逾制，乃奏没入之。
早先时候，皇甫嵩讨伐张角，经过邺，看到中常侍赵忠的住宅超出规定，于是上奏没收。
When Huangfu Song passed by Ye while fighting Zhang Jiao, he found Palace Attendant Zhao Zhong's residence exceeded regulation and reported it for confiscation.

又中常侍张让私求钱五千万，嵩不与，二人由此为憾，奏嵩连战无功，所费者多。
还有中常侍张让私下向皇甫嵩索要五千万钱，皇甫嵩没有答应，二人因此怀恨上奏说皇甫嵩屡战无功，军费开销太多。
Palace Attendant Zhang Rang privately demanded fifty million coins, which Huangfu Song refused; resentful, the two reported that Huangfu Song had repeatedly fought without success and that his military expenses were excessive.

其秋征还，收左车骑将军印绶，削户六千，更封都乡侯二千户。
那年秋天他被征回朝廷，收回了左车骑将军的印绶，削减封邑六千户，改封为都乡侯，食邑二千户。
That autumn he was summoned back; the seal of Left General of Chariot and Horse was taken from him, six thousand households were removed from his fief, and he was regranted the title Marquis of Duxiang with two thousand households.

五年，梁州贼王国围陈仓，复拜嵩为左将军，督前将军董卓，各率二万人拒之。
五年时，梁州的贼首王国围攻陈仓，朝廷又任命皇甫嵩为左将军，督率前将军董卓，双方各自率二万人抵御敌军。
In the fifth year, the bandit Wang Guo from Liangzhou besieged Chencang; Huangfu Song was again made Left General and put over Vanguard General Dong Zhuo, each commanding twenty thousand men to resist.

卓欲速进赴陈仓，嵩不听。
董卓想迅速进军陈仓，皇甫嵩不同意他的主张。
Dong Zhuo wanted to advance quickly to Chencang, but Huangfu Song disagreed.

王国围陈仓，自冬迄春八十余日，城坚守固，竟不能拔，贼众疲敝，果自解去。
王国围攻陈仓，从冬天到春天八十多日，城守坚固而未被攻破，贼众疲乏，果然撤退。
Wang Guo besieged Chencang for over eighty days from winter into spring; the city held firm, the besiegers grew weary, and eventually they withdrew.

嵩进兵击之。
皇甫嵩于是发兵追击敌人。
Huangfu Song then advanced his forces to attack them.

卓曰：“不可，兵法曰穷寇勿迫，归众勿追，今我追国，是迫归众追穷寇也，困兽犹斗，蜂虿有毒，况大众乎？”
董卓说：“不行，兵法上说穷寇不要逼，归拢的敌人不要追。现在我们追击王国，就是在逼迫回散的众人和追赶走投无路的敌人。困兽仍会挣扎，蜂虿有毒，更何况人多？”
Dong Zhuo said, "No, military doctrine says do not press a routed foe nor pursue those returning to their base. If we pursue Wang Guo now, we are pressing the returning groups and chasing desperate enemies. A cornered beast still fights and a stinging creature is poisonous, let alone a large force."

嵩曰：“不然，前吾不击，避其锐也；今而击之，待其衰也。所击者疲师，非归众也。”
皇甫嵩说：“不是这样，先前我不进攻，是为了避开他们的锐气；如今攻击，是等待他们衰弱之时。我们要打的是疲惫的军队，不是回合而散的众人。”
Huangfu Song replied, "No. Earlier I refrained to avoid their peak strength; now to strike is to wait for their decline. We attack the exhausted troops, not the returning masses."

国众且走，莫有斗志，以整击乱，非穷寇也。
王国的部众将要逃跑，没有斗志。我们是以严整的军队打击军心大乱的军队，不是去打走投无路的穷寇。
Wang Guo's soldiers were about to flee, lacking fighting spirit. We attacked the disordered enemy with an organized army, not pursuing utterly desperate foes.

遂独进击之，使卓为后拒。
于是独自带兵进攻，让董卓作为后援。
Therefore, he took the army alone to attack, assigning Dong Zhuo to guard the rear.

连战，大破之，斩首万余级，国走而死。
连续几战大败他们，斩杀一万多人，王国逃跑而死。
After several battles, he decisively defeated them, beheading over ten thousand; Wang Guo died while fleeing.

卓大惭恨，由是忌嵩。
董卓很惭愧并心生怨恨，因此忌恨皇甫嵩。
Dong Zhuo felt ashamed and resentful, thus he came to distrust Huangfu Song.

明年，卓拜为并州牧，诏使以兵委嵩，卓不从。
第二年，董卓担任并州牧，皇帝下诏让他把部队交给皇甫嵩，董卓不听从命令。
The next year, Dong Zhuo was appointed Governor of Bingzhou; the emperor ordered him to submit his troops to Huangfu Song, which Dong Zhuo refused.

于是上书以闻帝让卓。
于是上书汇报，皇帝责令董卓。
Huangfu Song submitted a memorial reporting this, and the emperor reprimanded Dong Zhuo.

卓又增怨于嵩。
董卓因此更加怨恨皇甫嵩。
This increased Dong Zhuo's resentment toward Huangfu Song.

及后秉政，初平元年，乃征嵩为城门校尉，因欲杀之。
等到后来掌握政权，初平元年(190年)，就征召皇甫嵩担任城门校尉，想趁此机会把他杀害。
When Dong Zhuo seized power in the first year of Chuping (190), he summoned Huangfu Song as Commandant of the Capital Gates, intending to kill him.

有司承旨，奏嵩下吏，将遂诛之。
有关部门受董卓的授意，上奏把皇甫嵩收监，准备杀了他。
Officials, following Dong Zhuo’s order, reported that Huangfu Song should be imprisoned and executed.

嵩子坚寿与卓素善，自长安亡走洛阳，归投于卓。
皇甫嵩的儿子皇甫坚寿和董卓关系一向很好，他从长安跑到洛阳，投靠董卓。
Huangfu Song’s son, Huangfu Jianshou, who had always been on good terms with Dong Zhuo, fled from Chang’an to Luoyang and sought Dong Zhuo’s protection.

卓方置酒欢会，坚寿直前质让，责以大义，叩头流涕。
董卓正设置酒席高兴地聚会，皇甫坚寿直走向前来批评董卓，以大义责让他，叩头大哭。
During Dong Zhuo’s banquet, Jianshou boldly approached, reproaching him with righteousness, kowtowing and weeping.

坐者感动，皆离席请之。
参加聚会的人都为之感动，都离开席位请求董卓。
The guests were moved, rose from their seats, and pleaded with Dong Zhuo.

卓乃起，牵与共坐，使免嵩囚。
董卓于是起身，拉着皇甫坚寿一起坐下，派人去释放皇甫嵩。
Dong Zhuo then stood, took Jianshou’s hand to sit together, and sent someone to release Huangfu Song.

复拜嵩议郎，迁御史中丞。
又授予皇甫嵩议郎的职务，升御史中丞。
Huangfu Song was appointed Court Gentleman for Consultation and then promoted to Censor-in-chief.

等到董卓回长安，公卿百官在路上迎接拜见。
等到董卓回长安，公卿百官在路上迎接拜见。
Chang'an, all the high-ranking officials waited on the way to welcome him.

董卓授意御史中丞以下都要下拜他，以此屈辱皇甫嵩。
董卓授意御史中丞以下都要下拜他，以此屈辱皇甫嵩。
Dong Zhuo decreed that officials whose ranks were below Palace Aide or Censor-in-chief must kneel down and kowtow to him, intending to embarrass Huangfu Song.

既而抵手言曰：“义真，辅未乎?”
既而抵手言曰：“义真，辅未乎?”
He clapped his hands and said, “Yizhen, are you submitting to me?”

嵩笑而谢之，卓乃解释。
嵩笑而谢之，卓乃解释。
Huangfu Song smiled and apologized. Dong Zhuo stopped fussing about Huangfu Song from that time on.

及卓被诛，以嵩为征西将军，又迁车骑将军。
及卓被诛，以嵩为征西将军，又迁车骑将军。
After Dong Zhuo was killed, the court appointed Huangfu Song to be General of Western Expedition and then to be General of Chariot and Horse.

其年秋，拜太尉。冬，以流星策免。复拜光禄大夫，迁太常。
其年秋，拜太尉。冬，以流星策免。复拜光禄大夫，迁太常。
In the autumn of that year, Huangfu Song started to serve as Defender-in-chief. In the winter, he was removed from his post due to the appearance of shooting stars. Later, he was re-appointed Grand Master for Splendid Happiness, and promoted to the post of Chamberlain for Ceremonials.

寻李傕作乱，嵩亦病卒，赠骠骑将军印绶，拜家一人为郎。
寻李傕作乱，嵩亦病卒，赠骠骑将军印绶，拜家一人为郎。
Not long after, Li Jue rebelled, and Huangfu Song died due to an illness. He was posthumously granted a seal of Cavalry General, and one of his family members was appointed Gentleman of the Interior.

嵩为人爱慎尽勤，前后上表陈谏有补益者五百余事，皆手书毁草，不宣于外。
嵩为人爱慎尽勤，前后上表陈谏有补益者五百余事，皆手书毁草，不宣于外。
As a person, Huangfu Song was kind, loving, and careful. He always did his job wholeheartedly. Altogether he submitted a total of more than five hundred memorials, all expressing his ideas about how to help and benefit the nation. He wrote each of them with his own hands and burned all the drafts after he had finished them so that they would not be circulated outside.

又折节下士，门无留客，时人皆称而附之。
又折节下士，门无留客，时人皆称而附之。
He always showed courtesy to his juniors and subordinates. When a guest arrived, he would see him right away instead of making him wait. During his lifetime, people praised and admired him and turned to him with their hearts and souls.

坚寿亦显名，后为侍中，辞不拜，病卒。
坚寿亦显名，后为侍中，辞不拜，病卒。
His son, Huangfu Jianshou, was also well-known. He was appointed to be Palace Attendant, but he declined the offer. He died due to an illness.