论曰：古者诸侯岁贡士，进贤受上赏，非贤贬爵土。
论曰：古代诸侯每年向国家推举贤士，进献贤人的受国家高等奖励，压制贤人的降低爵位封地。
Comments: In ancient times, every marquis used to recommend the most talented and able men to the court. Those who recommended talented men would be rewarded, and those who suppressed talented men would be demoted and have their fiefdoms confiscated.

升之司马，辩论其才，论定然后官之，任官然后禄之。
进献到司马那里，考核他的才能，考核确定后给他官职。任职后给他俸禄。
When these capable men were recommended to the Defender-in-chief, he would assess their talents and skills. After the assessment, he would assign an appropriate position to each of them, offering him a suitable salary.

故王者得其人，进仕劝其行，经邦弘务，所由久矣。
所以君主要得人才，授予官职激励他们的行为，管理国家圆满完成各种政务，历史悠久了。
Thus, an emperor must recruit talented and capable men. He must offer these men positions, encouraging and rewarding them for their proper manners, letting them govern the country and smoothly completing all kinds of political tasks. Such a recruitment method has been practiced for a long time.


汉初，诏举贤良、方正，州郡察孝廉、秀才，斯亦贡士之方也。
汉朝初年下诏推举贤良、方正，州郡考察孝廉、秀才，这也是进献贤人的办法。
In the first years of the Han Dynasty, an edict was issued for the recommendation of talented men to be Worthy and Excellent or Straightforward and Upright candidates. Each region or commandery would examine Filial and Incorrupt as well as Cultivated Talent candidates. This process provided a method for recommending talented men.

中兴以后，复增敦朴、有道、贤能、直言、独行、高节、质直、清白、敦厚之属，荣路既广，觖望难裁。
东汉以后，又增加了敦朴、有道、贤能、直言、独行、高节、质直、清白、敦厚这一类的名目。荣华的门路已广阔了，但想做官的人却更多了，得不到就怨望，难以裁制。
In the Later Han, the following titles for recommendation were added to the list—Honest and Simple, Enlightened, Worthy and Capable, Candid, Solitary, Lofty and Noble, Upright and Straightforward, Pure and Clean, Honest and Sincere. Consequently, the door to wealth had been widely broadened. But there were more and more people wishing to be recommended, and if not recommended, they would complain and express resentment.

自是窃名伪服，浸以流竞，权门贵仕，请谒繁兴。
从此窃取名声假穿儒服的现象愈演愈烈。特权高官的门下，来开后门的越来越多。
The situation became uncontrollable. People would inflate their fame and put on their Confucian dresses. This kind of behavior gradually became very serious. More and more followers of powerful and high-ranking officials took advantage of backdoor influences.

自左雄任事，限年试才，虽颇有不密，固亦因识时宜。
自从左雄负责选举的职务，限制年龄考核才能，虽然有不严密的地方，毕竟也符合时代。
Since Zuo Xiong was responsible for the job selection, he placed restrictions on age and examined each candidate's capability and talent. Even though not strict enough, his methods were suited to the time.

而黄琼、胡广、张衡、崔瑗之徒，泥滞旧方，互相诡驳。
而黄琼、胡广、张衡、崔瑗这些人，拘泥旧的办法，互相责难。
On the contrary, Huang Qiong, Hu Guang, Zhang Heng, and Cui Yuan were restrained by the old methods and reprimanded one another.

循名者屈其短，算实者挺其效。
重虚名的人，数左雄的短处来压制他；讲实际的人，则推重他的实效。
Those who valued false reputation disclosed Zuo Xiong's shortcomings in order to suppress him, while those who were practical promoted and respected his effectiveness.

故雄在尚书，天下不敢妄选，十余年间，称为得人，斯亦效实之征乎？
所以左雄担任尚书令，天下不敢虚假选举，十多年时间，被称为得人才的时期，这不就是讲求实际的效果吗？
In Zuo Xiong's duration as Director of the Imperial Secretariat, no one in the whole country dared to make a false recommendation. For about ten years running, many capable and talented men were selected. Isn't this the effectiveness obtained from understanding reality and being practical?


顺帝始以童弱反政，而号令自出，知能任使，故士得用情，天下喁喁，仰其风采。
汉顺帝最初以一个小年轻人管理国家，而能够有效掌握政权，知人善任，所以选拔的人都真才实学，人民向着他，仰慕他的风采。
When Emperor Shun ascended the throne, he was still young, but he was able to exercise his power effectively and appoint people to suitable positions. Therefore, all of those selected possessed genuine talent and learning. The people supported him and admired his integrity and demeanor.

遂乃备玄熏玉帛，以聘南阳樊英。
于是就备了玄熏玉帛的重礼，以聘请南阳人樊英。
He once prepared very respectful rewards made with black and green silks as an invitation token to Fan Ying, a native of Nanyang.

天子降寝殿，设坛席，尚书奉引，延问失得。
天子走下寝殿，设置坛席，由尚书开路，请教政治得失。
His Majesty walked down from his inner quarter and set up a lecture platform. Led by the Imperial Secretary, the emperor received a lecture from Fan Ying regarding success and failure in governing.

——急登贤之举，虚降己之礼。
致力于选拔贤人，对贤者以礼相待。
His Majesty devoted himself to recruiting the able and talented, and in doing so, put himself in a humble position.

于是处土鄙生，忘其拘儒，拂巾衽褐，以企旌车之招矣。
因此不入仕途的士子及乡野儒生也不顾自己的浅薄与狭隘，人人振奋，以企望朝廷来征召他了。
Consequently, the recluses and humble gentlemen gave no thought to their meager knowledge and were excited at the possibility of being summoned by His Majesty.

至乃英能承风，俊乂咸事。
最终达到能人承风而来，有才华的人都来从事政治。
Such capable people came to the court quickly, as if riding with the wind, and many talented men engaged in government affairs.

若李固、周举之渊谟弘深，左雄、黄琼之政事贞固，桓焉、杨厚以儒学进，崔瑗、马融以文章显。
像李固、周举的深谋远虑，左雄、黄琼之政事强固，桓焉、杨厚以儒学进用显名，而崔瑗、马融以文章显。
People like Li Gu and Zhou Ju were circumspect and far-sighted; Zuo Xiong and Huang Qiong were firm and strong in governmental affairs; Huan Yan and Yang Hou were appointed because of their Confucian learning; Cui Yuan and Ma Rong were famous for their literary talents.


栾巴牧民之良干，庞参、虞诩将帅之宏规，王龚、张皓虚心以推士，张纲、杜乔直道以纠违，郎颚阴阳详密，张衡机术特妙。
吴祐、苏章、种嵩、栾巴是管理人民的好手，庞参、虞诩具有将帅之宏大气象，王龚、张皓虚心以推举贤士，张纲、杜乔直道而行检举奸臣，郎频于阴阳之学翔实精密，张衡机械的技术精妙绝伦。
Wu You, Su Zhang, Zhong Song, and Luan Ba were good at managing people; Pang Shen and Yu Xu possessed the dignity and greatness of military generals; Wang Gong and Zhang Hao sincerely recommended capable and talented men; Zhang Gang and Du Qiao were straightforward in their behavior and reported treacherous officials; Lang Yi’s learning of yin and yang was profound and precise; Zhang Heng’s skill at constructing machinery was exquisite and accurate.

——东京之士，于兹盛焉。
东汉的贤人，这个时候真是繁盛。
As seen above, talented and capable men were abundant indeed in the Later Han Dynasty.

向使庙堂纳其高谋，疆场宣其智力，帷幄容其謇辞，举厝禀其成式，则武、宣之轨，岂其远而?
假使朝廷采纳他们高明的谋略，边疆上发挥他们的智力，皇帝接受他们的直言，国家措施继承他们的成规，那么武帝、宣帝的盛世，哪里还会远呢?
If the court had adopted their excellent strategies, utilized their wisdom at the frontiers, accepted their honest advice, and followed their established principles, would a prosperous age like that of Emperors Wu and Xuan have been far away?

《诗》云：“靡不有初，鲜克有终。”可为恨哉!
《诗经》说：“都有开始，很少有善终。”真值得为之遗憾啊!
In the Book of Songs it says, "Every endeavor has a good start, but few can finish well." What a pity!


及孝桓之时，硕德继兴。
等到孝桓帝的时候，道德高深的人依然陆续出现。
During the reign of Emperor Xiaohuan, there were still plenty of people with lofty virtue.

陈蕃、杨秉处称贤宰。
陈蕃、杨秉在内被称为贤良的宰辅。
Chen Fan and Yang Bing were praised as capable and talented ministers and assistants.

皇甫、张、段出号名将。
皇甫规、张奂、段频在外号称名将。
Huangfu Gui, Zhang Huan, and Duan Jiong were applauded as famous generals.

王畅、李膺弥缝衮阙。
王畅、李膺纠正皇帝的失误。
Wang Chang and Li Ying rectified the emperor's mistakes.

朱穆、刘陶献替匡时。
朱穆、刘陶献替可否匡正时失。
Zhu Mu and Liu Tao admonished the emperor for misbehavior and corrected the maladies of the times.

郭有道奖鉴人伦。
郭有道激励鉴别人伦。
Guo Youdao encouraged and evaluated human relations.

陈仲弓弘道下邑。
陈仲弓在地方弘扬道德。
Chen Zhonggong enhanced morality in local places.

其余宏儒远智，高心絜行，激扬风流者，不可胜言。
其他大儒有远见的，行为高洁的，激励风气的，多得难以数清。
There were other great Confucian scholars who were far-sighted, lofty and pure, and who promoted morality. These people were too numerous to be counted.

而斯道莫振，文武陵队。
而汉朝政治却不能振起，文治武功衰弱。
However, the Han Dynasty could not restore its prosperity as it had before, and both civilian and military strength declined.

在朝者以正议婴戮，谢事者以党锢致灾。
在朝者因为正直的言论被杀，在野的因为党锢案受难。
Those who served at court were killed for honest and straightforward speech, and those outside suffered from the disasters caused by political factions.

往车虽折，而来轸方遒。
前面的车子倒了，后面的车子反而更为急进。
When the front carriage broke down, the rear one moved forward with aggressive speed.

所以倾而未颠，决而未溃，岂非仁人君子心力之为乎?
倾斜而不倒下、开裂而不溃烂的原因，不就是这些仁人君子的心力所造就的吗?
Aren’t the efforts and achievements of these benevolent and righteous gentlemen the reason for us to incline but not fall, to spill forth but not rot?

呜呼!
唉!
Alas!
