王涣字稚子，广汉郪人也。
王涣字稚子，广汉郡郪县人。
Wang Huan, style named Zhizi, was a native of Qi District in Guanghan Commandery.

父顺，安定太守。
父亲王顺，官至安定太守。
His father, Wang Shun, served as Governor of Anding.

涣少好侠，尚气力，数通剽轻少年。
王涣年轻时喜欢行侠仗义，崇尚武术，经常和不良青年交往。
At an early age, Wang Huan liked to be chivalrous and uphold martial arts, and often associated with unruly youths.

晚而改节，敦儒学，习《尚书》,读律令，略举大义。
后来改变操守，崇尚儒学，学习《尚书》，阅读法律条令，略通大义。
Later he changed his behavior, became virtuous, studied Confucianism and the Book of Documents, read laws and regulations, and grasped their overall meaning.

为太守陈宠功曹，当职割断，不避豪右。
担任太守陈宠的功曹，在任上不徇私情，不怕得罪地方豪族。
He served under Governor Chen Chong as an official in the Labor Section, executing duties impartially and without fear of offending powerful local families.

宠风声大行，入为大司农。
陈宠风度名声广泛传播，入朝担任大司农。
Chen Chong’s reputation spread widely, and he was promoted to the post of Chamberlain for National Treasury.

和帝问曰：“在郡何以为理?”
和帝问他说：“你在广汉郡是如何治理好的?”
Emperor He asked, “How did you govern Guanghan Commandery so well?”

宠顿首谢曰：“臣任功曹王涣，以简贤选能；主簿谭显，拾遗补阙，臣奉宣诏书而已。”
陈宠叩头辞让功劳，说：“我委任功曹王涣，以选拔贤能；委任主簿谭显，拾遗补阙，我只不过宣布诏书而已。”
Chen Chong kowtowed, politely declining the praise, and said, “I entrusted Wang Huan, the officer in charge of the Labor Section, with selecting the capable and talented. I entrusted Recorder Tan Xian with collecting and editing written official materials. My duty is only to announce Your Majesty’s decree.”

帝大悦。涣由此显名。
和帝很开心，王涣因此出名。
Emperor He was very pleased, and Wang Huan became famous because of this.


州举茂才，除温令。
州推举他为茂才，被任命为温县令。
The commandery recommended Wang Huan as a candidate of Cultivated Talent. He was appointed District Magistrate of Wen.

县多奸猾，积为人患，涣以方略讨击，悉诛之。
县里多奸猾之徒，长期危害百姓。王涣用计谋讨击，消灭了他们。
In this district, there were many crafty and evil people who had long harmed the local people. Wang Huan employed strategy to suppress and eliminate them.

境内清夷，商人露宿于道；其有放牛者，辄云以属稚子，终无侵犯。
县境内从此清平，商人露宿在路上。有放牛的人，就说把牛托付给王稚子，始终没有被侵犯。
Since then, the district was peaceful. Merchants could stay overnight on the road, and cowherds would entrust their cows to Wang Zhizi, never suffering any assault.

在温三年，迁兖州刺史，绳正部郡，风威大行。
在温县三年，升为兖州刺史，严格约束端正所属各郡吏治，风度威信大行于兖州。
After three years serving Wen District, he was promoted to Regional Inspector of Yanzhou, enforcing strict and proper governance over the subordinates and commandery officials, gaining great prestige in Yanzhou.

后坐考妖言不实论，岁余，征拜侍御史。
后来因为考核妖言不实被论罪。一年多后，被征召授侍御史之职。
Later, he was punished for reporting false prophecies. About a year later, he was appointed Attendant Censor.

永元十五年，从驾南巡，还为洛阳令。
永元十五年(公元103年)，随从皇帝南巡，回来担任洛阳令。
In the fifteenth year of the Yongyuan era (103), he accompanied the emperor on a southern inspection tour and on return was appointed Director of Luoyang.

以平正居身，得宽猛之宜。
以平和正直自处，为政不宽不猛，恰到好处。
He disciplined himself with mildness and integrity. His method of governing was neither too lenient nor too harsh, but just right.

其冤嫌久讼，历政所不断，法理所难平者，莫不曲尽情诈，压塞群疑。
其中有冤案、疑案等积压案件，历届政府所不能判决的，法官所难以摆平的，无不弄清真伪，消除大家的疑点。
Cases of grievances or disputes that had been long unresolved and difficult for previous administrations or judges to settle were all clarified, and confusion and doubts were removed.

又能以谲数发摘奸伏，京师称叹，以为涣有神等。
又能用巧妙的办法，揭发和暴露隐藏的恶人坏事。京师百姓称赞惊叹，以为王涣有神算。
He also skillfully exposed hidden criminals and their deeds. The public in the capital marveled, believing Wang Huan had miraculous foresight.

元兴元年，病卒。
元兴元年(公元105年)，王涣得病而死。
In the first year of the Yuanxing era (105), Wang Huan died of illness.

百姓、市道莫不咨嗟。男女老壮，皆相与赋敛致奠以千数。
百姓、市民、道路往来的人们无不悲叹。男女老少都一起凑钱，以酒祭奠王涣的有上千人。
The local people, including travelers and city residents, were all saddened. More than one thousand men, women, young and old, pooled money to offer memorial services to Wang Huan.

涣丧西归，道经弘农，民庶皆设槃桉于路。
王涣的丧车向西回老家广汉，路过弘农郡，百姓都在路旁摆了盘碗。
Wang Huan's funeral cart went west to return to his hometown Guanghan, and as it passed through Hongnong Commandery, the local people set up plates and bowls along the road.

吏问其故，咸言平常持米到洛。
官吏问他们原因，皆言平时用米到洛阳。
When officials asked why, they all said it was customary to bring rice to Luoyang.

为卒司所钞，恒亡其半；自王君在事，不见侵枉，故来报恩其政。
都说以前带着米粮到洛阳，被有关部门所掠夺，常常要损失一半。自从王涣做了洛阳令，没有再被侵夺，所以来报答他的恩德。
Officials said that in the past, when they brought grains to Luoyang, officials would seize half of it, causing them to lose half. Since Wang Huan served as Director, none were deprived, so they came to repay his benevolence.

化怀物如此!民思其德，为立祠安阳亭西，每食辄弦歌而荐之。
王涣的善政教化使人们怀念到这样的境界!人民怀念他的恩德，为他在安阳亭西建了庙宇，每次吃饭就行音乐歌舞而上供食品。
His benevolent governance and moral teachings were so influential that the people revered him. They built a temple west of Anyang Pavilion and offered food with music and dance at every meal.

永初二年，邓太后诏曰：“夫忠良之吏，国家所以为理也，求之甚勤，得之至寡。故孔子曰：‘才难，不其然乎?’昔大司农朱邑、右扶风尹翁归，政迹茂异，令名显闻，孝宣皇帝嘉叹愍惜，而以黄金百斤策赐其子。
永初二年(公元108年)，邓太后下诏说：“忠良的官吏，是国家政治清明的原因。寻求他们很努力，得到的却很少。所以孔子说：‘人才难得，难道不是这样吗?'以前的大司农朱邑、右扶风尹翁归，政绩突出，美名流传，孝宣皇帝赞美并哀怜，而以黄金百斤下策文赏赐他们的儿子。
In the second year of the Yongchu era (108), Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict saying, “Loyal and virtuous officials maintain an upright and well-governed state. We strive hard to find them, but they are very few. As Confucius said, 'Talents are hard to come by, isn't that so?' In the past, Chamberlain for the National Treasury Zhu Yi and Right Guardian Yin Wenggui had outstanding political achievements, widely praised and renowned. Emperor Xiaoxuan admired and mourned them, rewarding a hundred jin of gold to their sons.

故洛阳令王涣，秉清修之节，蹈《羔羊》之义，尽心奉公，务在惠民；功业未遂，不幸早世。百姓追思，为之立祠，自非忠爱之至，孰能若斯者乎!
已故洛阳县令王涣，秉持清修的节操，遵循《羔羊》所说的廉洁有度的义理，尽心奉公，致力于惠爱人民，功业没有大成，不幸早逝，百姓追念思慕，为他立庙祭祀。如果不是忠于国家爱护人民到了极点，怎么能出现这样的情况呢!
The late Director of Luoyang, Wang Huan, upheld integrity and purity, following the righteous principles of the “Gaoyang.” He devoted himself to public service, benefiting the people. He passed away prematurely before achieving full success. The people, in their remembrance, built a temple to honor him. If not for their utmost loyalty and love for him, how could such a thing occur?

今以涣子石为郎中，以劝劳勤。”
现在用王涣的儿子王石担任郎中，以激励勤劳的官员。”
Now, Wang Huan’s son Wang Shi should be appointed Gentleman of the Interior to encourage diligent and conscientious officials.


延熹中，桓帝事黄老道，悉毁诸房祀；唯特诏密县存故太傅卓茂庙，洛阳留王涣祠焉。
延熹年间，桓帝信奉黄、老之道，全毁了各种祭祀场所，惟独特别下诏命令密县保留故太傅卓茂的庙，命令洛阳保留王涣祠。
During the era of Yanxi,Emperor Huan both believed in and advocated  the  philosophies   of  the  Yellow  Emperor  and  of  Laozi.Therefore,he destroyed all the places of worship were destroyed, but a special decree was issued to preserve the late Grand Mentor Zhuo Mao’s temple in Mi District and the shrine of Wang Huan in Luoyang.

谭显后亦知名，安帝时为豫州刺史。时天下饥荒，竞为盗贼，州界收捕且万余人。显愍其困穷自陷刑辟，辄擅赦之。因自劾奏，有诏勿理。
镡显后来也以政绩知名，安帝时担任豫州刺史。这个时候，天下闹饥荒，百姓纷纷去做盗贼，豫州界内抓了将近一万多人。镡显可怜他们因为穷困而做了强盗犯了法，就擅自赦免了他们，于是自己检举自己的错误上奏。朝廷下诏令不处理他。
Later, Tan Xian also became known for his good governance, and he was appointed Regional Inspector of Yuzhou during Emperor An’s reign. At that time, famine struck the land, and many people became bandits. In Yuzhou more than ten thousand people were arrested. Tan Xian sympathized with them because poverty had forced them into crime, so he pardoned them on his own initiative. He reported his action to the court, and the emperor decreed not to punish him.

后位至长乐卫尉。自涣卒后，连诏三公特选洛阳令，皆不称职。永和中，以剧令勃海任峻补之。峻擢用文武吏，皆尽其能，纠剔奸盗，不得旋踵。一岁断狱，不过数十，威风猛于涣，而文理不及之。峻字叔高，终于太山太守。
后来镡显位至长乐卫尉。自从王涣死后，朝廷连下诏书命令三公专门选拔洛阳县令，选出来的都不称职。永和年间，用剧县令勃海人任峻任洛阳令。任峻所擢用的文武官吏，都使他们发挥全部才能，纠察奸邪盗寇，都要即时破获，不得稍有迟误。一年所判决的案子，不过几十个，威势比王涣猛烈，而文德治理不及王涣。任峻字叔高，在太山太守任上去世。
He later served as Chamberlain for the Palace Garrison of Changle. After Wang Huan died, the court repeatedly issued orders requiring the Three Dukes to select the Director of Luoyang, but none of those chosen were competent. During the Yonghe era, Ren Jun, a magistrate from Ju District in Bohai, was appointed Director of Luoyang. The civil and military officials he selected fully displayed their talents. He strictly corrected criminal and corrupt acts, leaving no delay in enforcement. In a year, the cases he handled numbered only several dozen. His power and authority were stronger than Wang Huan’s, but his literary and administrative skills were inferior. Ren Jun, style name Shugao, died while serving as Governor of Taishan.
