蔡伦字敬仲，桂阳人也。
蔡伦字敬仲，桂阳人在永平末年开始在内宫供职。
Cai Lun, style named Jingzhong, was a native of Guiyang.

以永平末始给事宫掖，建初中，为小黄门及和帝即位，转中常侍，豫参帷幄。
建初年间(公元76—84年)，他担任小黄门，到汉和帝即位，升为中常侍，参预筹划发布政令之事。
He started his service at the inner palace chamber at the end of the Yongping era. During the Jianchu era (76–84), he served as Junior Attendant of Eunuchs. When Emperor He of Han ascended the throne, he was promoted to Palace Attendant-in-ordinary and participated in planning and announcing governing policies.

伦有才学，尽心敦慎，数犯严颜，匡弼得失。
蔡伦有才能学问，尽心尽力敦厚谨慎，常常对皇帝有所谏诤，纠正皇帝的过失。
Cai Lun was talented and erudite, and he devoted himself wholeheartedly to state politics. Kind and cautious, he often presented admonitions to the emperor, correcting the emperor's mistakes.

每至休沐，辄闭门绝宾，暴体田野。
每到休假，就闭门谢客，在田地里干点农活。
When he had a day off, he would close his door and not receive anyone, instead working in his fields.

后加位尚方令。
后来升任尚方令。
Later, he was promoted to the post of Directorate for Imperial Manufactories.

永元九年，监作秘剑及诸器械，莫不精工坚密，为后世法。
永元九年(公元97年)，蔡伦监督制作秘剑以及各种器械，无不精细牢固，成为后代的标准器。
In the ninth year of the Yongyuan era (97), Cai Lun supervised the making of rare swords and various weapons and machineries in such a meticulous, firm, and reliable fashion that they became standard references for later generations.

自古书契，多编以竹简，其用缣帛者谓之为纸。
自古书写的材料，多用竹简编连，那些用绸缎布匹写的就叫做纸。
Since ancient times, materials used for writing were mostly bamboo slips strung together, while the use of fine silk or cloth for writing was called “paper.”

缣贵而简重，并不便于人。
绸缎价值贵重而竹简分量重，对人而言都不便利。
Fine silk was valuable and expensive, and bamboo slips were heavy, both inconvenient for people.

伦乃造意，用树肤、麻头及敝布、鱼网以为纸。
蔡伦于是出一个点子，用树皮、麻头以及破布、渔网造成纸。
Therefore, Cai Lun devised a method to make paper using tree bark, hemp, worn cloth, and fish nets.

元兴元年，奏上之。
元兴元年(公元105年)，上书献给皇帝。
In the first year of the Yuanxing era (105), he submitted this invention to the emperor.


帝善其能，自是莫不从用焉，故天下咸称“蔡侯纸”
皇帝认为他很有才能，从此都采用他造的纸，因此天下都称这种纸为“蔡侯纸”
The emperor appreciated his ability and from then on everyone used the paper he made so it became known throughout the world as “Marquis Cai Paper”
元初元年，邓太后以伦久宿卫，封为龙亭侯，邑三百户
元初元年邓太后因蔡伦长期在宫中侍奉封他为龙亭侯食邑三百户
In the first year of the Yuanchu era Empress Dowager Deng granted him the title Marquis of Longting with a fief of three hundred households because he had long served in the palace
后为长乐太仆
后来他担任长乐太仆
He later served as Chamberlain for the Imperial Stud of Changle
四年，帝以经传之文多不正定，乃选通儒谒者刘珍及博士良史诣东观，各雠校家法，令伦监典其事
元初四年皇帝见经传文字多未统一便选通儒谒者刘珍及博士良史赴东观各以家法校勘并命蔡伦监督此事
In the fourth year the emperor saw that the texts of the Classics and Commentaries lacked uniformity so he selected the Confucian scholar Liu Zhen and erudite historians to go to the Eastern Library to collate the texts with their family methods and ordered Cai Lun to supervise the work
伦初受窦后讽旨，诬陷安帝祖母宋贵人
蔡伦最初受窦太后暗示诬陷了安帝的祖母宋贵人
In the beginning Cai Lun followed Empress Dowager Dou’s hint and framed Worthy Lady Song the grandmother of Emperor An
及太后崩，安帝始亲万机，敕使自致廷尉
等到窦太后去世安帝开始亲政便下敕令蔡伦到廷尉自首
After Empress Dowager Dou died Emperor An began to govern personally and issued an edict ordering Cai Lun to surrender himself to the Chamberlain of Law Enforcement
伦耻受辱，乃沐浴整衣冠，饮药而死，国除
蔡伦以耻受刑辱便沐浴整衣冠饮毒药自杀其侯国被撤销
Ashamed to suffer humiliation Cai Lun bathed dressed formally drank poison and died and his marquisate was abolished