王景字仲通，乐浪讲邯人也。
王景字仲通，乐浪郡讲邯人。
Wang Jing, style named Zhongtong, was a native of Nanhan in Lelang Commandery.

八世祖仲，本琅邪不其人，好道术，明天文。
八世祖王仲，本是琅玕郡不其县人，喜好道术，通晓天文。
The eighth generation ancestor, Wang Zhong, was originally from Buqi District in Langye Commandery. Wang Zhong was fond of Daoist magic and very knowledgeable about astrology.

诸吕作乱，齐哀王襄谋发兵，而数问于仲。
吕后娘家乱政，齐哀王刘襄计划发兵讨伐，几次向王仲请教。
When Empress Lv's brothers were causing political disorder, King Ai of Qi Liu Xiang planned to lead his army to suppress them. He sought advice from Wang Zhong several times.

及济北王兴居反，欲委兵师仲。仲惧祸及，乃浮海东奔乐浪山中，因而家焉。
等到济北王刘兴居谋反，想把军队交给王仲领导，王仲惧怕被灾祸牵连，于是渡海向东逃奔到乐浪山中，于是把家安置在这里。
When King of Jibei Liu Xingju rebelled, Liu Xiang hoped Wang Zhong to lead his army, but Wang Zhong was afraid to involve himself in this disaster. Therefore, he crossed over the river to the east and hid in Lelang Mountain, where he settled down at last.

父闳为郡三老。
父亲王闳，担任郡三老。
Wang Jing's father, Wang Hong, served as one of the Three Elders of the commandery.

更始败，土人王调，杀郡守刘宪，自称大将军、乐浪太守。
更始败亡的时候，地方人士王调杀了乐浪郡守刘宪，自称大将军、乐浪太守。
When Gengshi was overthrown, a local person Wang Diao killed Governor of Lelang Liu Xian and declared himself Grand General and Governor of Lelang.

建武六年，光武遣太守王遵将兵击之。至辽东，闳与郡决曹史扬邑等共杀调迎遵，皆封为列侯，闳独让爵。
建武六年(公元30年), 光武派遣太守王遵率兵进攻他。到辽东，王闳与郡的决曹史杨邑等人共同杀了王调迎接王遵，他们都被封为列侯，惟独王闳辞让爵位。
In the sixth year of the Jianwu era (30), Emperor Guangwu ordered Governor Wang Zun to lead troops to attack him. When Wang Hong and Yang Yi, Clerk of the Judicial Section of the commandery, arrived in Liaodong, they killed Wang Diao and welcomed Wang Zun. They were honored with the title of marquis. Among them, only Wang Hong declined the honor.

帝奇而征之，道病卒。
光武帝以此为奇而征召王闳，路上病死了。
Emperor Guangwu was surprised, so he summoned Wang Hong to the capital. Wang Hong died en route, due to an illness.


景少学《易》，遂广窥众书，又好天文、术数之事，沉深多伎艺。
王景年轻时学习《易经》，于是广泛阅读各种书记，又喜好天文术数之学，为人深沉大度，伎能又多。
In his early years, Wang Jing studied the Book of Changes. He read widely and broadly from a variety of books and records. He was fond of the study of astrology, machinery, and mathematics. As a person, he was both reserved and magnanimous. He also possessed many skills.

辟司空伏恭府。
被征召进入司空伏恭府任职。
He was summoned to serve under Chief Commandant-protector Fu Gong.

时有荐景能理水者，显宗诏与将作谒者王吴共修作浚仪渠。
当时有人推荐王景能治水，显宗皇帝下诏命他与将作谒者王吴一起修建浚仪渠。
During that time, someone recommended Wang Jing, praising his skill at regulating rivers and watercourses. Therefore, Emperor Xian ordered him to work with Palace Buildings Commissioner Wang Wu to construct Junyi Channel.

吴用景塆流法，水乃不复为害。
王吴采用王景提出的塆流法，于是这里不再有水灾。
Wang Wu adopted Wang Jing's method of using dikes to prevent water flow, so that no flood occurred there again from then on.

初，平帝时，河汴决坏，未及得修。
早先时候，汉平帝时期，黄河、汴河决堤，没有及时修复。
In earlier times, during the reign of Emperor Ping of Han, the embankments of the Yellow River and the Bian River breached. They were not repaired promptly.

建武十年，阳武令张汜上言：“河决积久，日月侵毁，济渠所漂数十许县。修理之费，其功不难，宜改修堤防，以安百姓。”
建武十年(公元34年),阳武县令张汜上书说：“黄河决堤时间已久，每日每月都在危害，被济渠淹没的有几十个县。花些钱修理，不难见效。应该改建堤防，以安定百姓。”
In the tenth year of the Jianwu era (34), District Magistrate of Yangwu Zhang Si reported, "The embankment of the Yellow River has been breached for a long time. Day by day, month by month, the damage gets worse. Several dozen districts have been flooded by the Ji Channel. It is apparent that we must spend money to repair it. We should construct a dike. Doing so, we will make life stable and peaceful for our people."

书奏，光武即为发卒，方营河功。
奏报上去，光武帝马上为此事征兵，正打算经营黄河水患之事。
After the report, Emperor Guangwu immediately summoned soldiers for the construction. He was just about to deal with the flooding situation at the Yellow River.

而浚仪令乐俊复上言：“昔元光之间，人庶炽盛，缘堤垦殖。而瓠子河决，尚二十余年，不即拥塞。今居家稀少，田地饶广，虽未修理，其患犹可。”
而浚仪县令乐俊又上书说：“以前元光年间，百姓众多，沿堤开垦种植，使得黄河瓠子段决口，经过二十多年，没有及时兴工堵塞。现在人口稀少，田地富饶广阔，虽然没有修理，水患还不是很严重。”
But just as he was about to deal with the flooding situation at the Yellow River, District Magistrate of Junyi Yue Jun submitted a report saying, "In the past, during the Yuanguang era, there was a large population around there. The local people opened up the land and cultivated crops along the embankment, causing the breach at the Piaozi section of the Yellow River. Neither prompt repair nor blocking construction has been done for more than twenty years. Now, the population is very sparse, but the land is rich, fertile, wide and broad.Even though the embankment has not been repaired, the flooding situation has not been too serious.





且新被兵革，方兴役力，劳怨既多，民不堪命。宜须平静，更议其事。
Furthermore, the people have just been through the wars. If we initiate a conscription for construction laborers now, and the work becomes too much, the public will be unable to endure. We should wait until the country is stable and peaceful, then we can discuss this issue again.

光武得此，遂止。
After Emperor Guangwu read this report, he halted the construction.

后汴渠东侵，日月弥广，而水门故处，皆在河中。
Later, however, the Bian Channel eroded eastward. The erosion spread, growing wider. The original location of the floodgate was now under water.

兖、豫百姓怨叹，以为县官恒兴他役，不先民急。
The local people of Yanzhou and Yuzhou resented this and complained. They felt that the emperor was always building—but never making the people's construction needs a top priority.

永平十二年，议修汴渠，乃引见景，问以理水形便。
In the twelfth year of the Yongping era (69), the emperor discussed the issue of repairing the Bian Channel. He summoned Wang Jing to see him. He asked Wang Jing about the advantages and disadvantages of controlling the watercourse, and for concrete information regarding such a project.

景陈其利害，应对敏给，帝善之。
Wang Jing's replies were agile and detailed. The emperor thought he had answered the questions very well.

又以尝修浚仪，功业有成，乃赐景《山海经》、《河渠书》、《禹贡图》及钱帛衣物。
Having constructed the Junyi Channel, Wang Jing had made a great contribution to the country. Therefore, the emperor awarded Wang Jing the following gifts: The Classic of Mountains and Seas, The Book of Rivers and Channels, and The Diagrams of Yu Gong, along with money, silk, cloth, and other items.

夏，遂发卒数十万，遣景与王吴修渠筑堤，自荥阳东至千乘海口千余里。
That summer, the emperor drafted several tens of thousands of laborers and sent Wang Jing and Wang Wu to construct the channel and repair the embankment. They started at Yingyang and worked eastward to the seaport in Qiansheng District, a distance of more than one thousand li.

景乃商度地势，凿山阜，破砥绩，直截沟涧，防遏冲要，竦决壅积，十里立一水门，令更相洄注，无复溃漏之患。
Wang Jing inspected the topography, cut through the mountains, dismantling and repairing the sections Yu had successfully constructed to control the flood. He cut streams off vertically, prevented water from flowing through strategically important areas, dredged and opened congested or blocked locations. He built a floodgate every ten li, promoting the circulation of water, so that flooding would no longer occur.


家稀少，田地饶广，虽未修理，其患犹可。
家里人口稀少，田地宽阔肥沃，即使没有修理，水患也还可以控制。
Even though the embankment has not been repaired, the flooding situation is still manageable.

且新被兵革，方兴役力，劳怨既多，民不堪命。
而且刚经历战乱，正在征调劳力，民众怨声载道，百姓无法承担更多的劳役。
Furthermore, the people have just endured war, and with labor conscription underway, the public is unable to bear further burdens.

宜须平静，更议其事。
应当先让局势平稳，再讨论修治此事。
It is better to wait for stability before discussing this matter further.

光武得此，遂止。
光武帝看到这上书，便停止了工程。
After Emperor Guangwu read this memorial, he halted the project.

后汴渠东侵，日月弥广，而水门故处，皆在河中。
后来，汴渠向东侵蚀，范围逐渐扩大，原水闸位置都淹没在河水中。
Later, the Bian Channel eroded eastward, gradually widening, and the original floodgate locations were submerged.

兖、豫百姓怨叹，以为县官恒兴他役，不先民急。
兖州、豫州的百姓为此怨恨叹息，认为县官总是兴建其他工程，却不先解决民生急务。
The people of Yanzhou and Yuzhou resented this, feeling that the local officials always started other projects without prioritizing urgent public needs.

永平十二年，议修汴渠，乃引见景，问以理水形便。
永平十二年（公元69年），商议整修汴渠，于是引见王景，询问他治理水患的便利与利害。
In the twelfth year of the Yongping era (69), the emperor discussed repairing the Bian Channel and summoned Wang Jing to inquire about the advantages and methods of water control.

景陈其利害，应对敏给，帝善之。
王景陈述利害，回答迅速而周详，皇帝觉得非常好。
Wang Jing explained the pros and cons with quick and thorough answers, which pleased the emperor.

又以尝修浚仪，功业有成，乃赐景《山海经》、《河渠书》、《禹贡图》，及钱帛衣物。
又因为他曾经修建浚仪渠，有过成效，于是赐给王景《山海经》、《河渠书》、《禹贡图》，以及钱帛衣物。
Having previously repaired the Junyi Channel with success, Wang Jing was rewarded with the Classic of Mountains and Seas, the Book of Rivers and Channels, the Diagrams of Yu Gong, and money, silk, and clothing.

夏，遂发卒数十万，遣景与王吴修渠筑堤，自荥阳东至千乘海口千余里。
夏天，于是征发几十万劳动力，派遣王景与王吴修渠筑堤，从荥阳向东到千乘县入海口一千余里。
That summer, tens of thousands of laborers were drafted, and Wang Jing and Wang Wu were sent to construct the channel and embankments from Yingyang eastward over a thousand li to the Qiansheng County seaport.

景乃商度地势，凿山阜，破砥绩，直截沟涧，防遏冲要，竦决壅积。
王景考察地势，开凿山岗，破除旧有障碍，直截沟涧，防止水流冲刷要害，疏通壅积之处。
Wang Jing studied the terrain, cut through hills, removed old obstructions, straightened gullies, blocked strategic water flow points, and dredged accumulated debris.

十里立一水门，令更相洄注，无复溃漏之患。
每十里设一水门，使水互相回流注入，不再有溃漏之患。
He built a floodgate every ten li, allowing water to circulate between them, preventing further breaches.

景虽简省役费，然犹以百亿计
王景虽节省劳力和费用，但仍需耗费巨大工程费用总数以百亿计算
Although Wang Jing economized on labor and costs, the total expenditure still amounted to billions

明年夏，渠成
第二年夏天渠道建成
In the summer of the following year the channel was completed

帝亲自巡行
皇帝亲自前往巡查
The emperor inspected the project in person

诏滨河郡国，置河堤员吏，如西京旧制
下诏命沿河郡国设置管理河堤的官吏如同西汉旧制
He issued an edict ordering commanderies and states along the river to appoint embankment officers according to the old Western Han system

景由是知名
王景因此出名
Because of this Wang Jing became well known

王吴及诸从事掾史，皆增秩一等
王吴及参与的各位掾史都加俸一级
Wang Wu and all the other retainers and clerks were each promoted by one grade

景三迁为侍御史
王景三次升迁成为侍御史
Wang Jing was promoted three times and became an Attendant Censor

十五年，从驾东巡狩至无盐
十五年他随皇帝东巡到达无盐
In the fifteenth year he accompanied the emperor eastward to Wuyan

帝美其功绩
皇帝称赞他的功绩
The emperor praised his achievements

拜河堤谒者，赐车马缣钱
授予他河堤谒者之职并赏赐车马缣钱
He was appointed River Conservancy Commissioner and rewarded with carriages horses silk and money

建初七年，迁徐州刺史
建初七年他升为徐州刺史
In the seventh year of Jianchu he was promoted to Regional Inspector of Xuzhou

先是，杜陵杜笃奏上《论都》欲令车驾迁还长安
此前杜陵人杜笃上奏《论都》想让皇帝迁都长安
Earlier Du Du of Duling submitted the work On Capitals seeking to move the capital back to Chang’an

耆老闻者皆动怀土之心，莫不眷然伫立西望
有声望的老人听后都引发乡情深情伫立向西遥望
The esteemed elders who heard this were moved with homesickness and stood gazing longingly toward the west

景以宫庙已立，恐人情疑惑
王景见宫殿祖庙已建成担心百姓疑惑
Wang Jing saw that the palace and ancestral temples had already been established and feared the people would grow unsettled

会时有神雀诸瑞
恰好此时出现神雀等祥瑞
At that time auspicious omens such as sacred birds appeared

乃作《金人论》颂洛邑之美，天人之符，文有可采
于是他写下《金人论》赞颂洛阳之美与天人相应文辞优美可取
He therefore composed On Golden People praising the beauty of Luoyang and its harmony with Heaven written in elegant admirable language


明年，迁庐江太守。
第二年，王景升为庐江太守。
In the following year, he was promoted to the Governorship of Lujiang.

先是百姓不知牛耕，致地力有余，而食常不足。
在他之前，庐江百姓不知道用牛耕田，因此形成土地很多而粮食经常不足的情况。
Before his arrival, the local people did not know they could use cows for ploughing, so even though there was plenty of land, food was often insufficient.

郡界有楚相孙叔敖所起芍陂稻田，景乃驱率吏民，修起芜废，教用犁耕。
郡的边界有楚国国相孙叔敖所建起的芍陂稻田。王景于是带领官吏百姓，开垦荒废，教他们用犁耕地。
On the border of the commandery, there was the “Shaopi Paddy Field” established by Chu State Counselor Sun Shu’ao. Wang Jing led officials and commoners to cultivate the abandoned land and taught them how to use a plough.

由是垦辟倍多，境内丰给。
因此开垦出来的土地比以前多了一倍，郡内人民生活丰足。
Consequently, the cultivable land was doubled, and the people became prosperous.

遂铭石刻誓，令民知常禁。
于是刻石立誓，使百姓了解一般的禁令。
He carved pledges on stone tablets so that the local people would understand the customary regulations.

又训令蚕织，为作法制，皆著于乡亭，庐江传其文辞。
又教他们养蚕织布，为他们制定法规，都写在乡亭里，庐江郡传诵他的文章。
He also taught them sericulture and weaving, formulated laws and rules, and recorded them in township offices; his writings were circulated in Lujiang Commandery.

卒于官。
王景死在任上。
He died while holding this office.

初，景以为《六经》所载，皆有卜筮，作事举止，质于蓍龟而众书错糅，吉凶相反。
早先时候，王景认为《六经》所记载的里面，都有卜筮，兴作工事以及举止行为，都取决于蓍龟，而各书错杂，所说的吉凶相反。
Earlier, Wang Jing believed that the writings in the Six Classics contained divinations; for construction, personal events, and conduct, the prophecies were revealed using stalks and tortoise-shell divination, yet the books were confused and sometimes contradictory regarding what was auspicious or inauspicious.

乃参纪众家数术文书、家宅禁忌、堪舆、日、相之属，适于事用者，集为《大衍玄基》云。
于是他参考各家数术文书、坟墓与住宅禁忌、堪舆、日相之术，选取适合日常使用的，集成《大衍玄基》。
Therefore, he examined texts on numerology and astrology from various schools, taboos for graves and houses, geomancy, dates, and physiognomy, selecting those suitable for practical use and compiled them in his book, The Fundamentals of the Great Generative Metaphysics.


