严光字子陵，一名遵，会稽余姚人也。少有高名，与光武同游学。
严光，字子陵，一名遵，会稽郡余姚县人。年轻时就有大名，与光武同学。
Yan Guang, style named Ziling, alternatively named Zun, was a native of Yuyao District in Kuaiji Commandery. While young, he had already become famous. He had been a classmate of Emperor Guangwu.

及光武即位，乃变名姓，隐身不见。
到光武做皇帝时，他就改换姓名，隐居起来不见光武。
When Guangwu ascended the throne, Yan Guang changed his name and became a recluse, for he did not want to see Emperor Guangwu any more.

帝思其贤，乃令以物色访之。
皇帝想着他的贤能，于是派人按他的形貌特征访求。
The emperor remembered his virtues and talents. Therefore, the emperor sent officials to search for him, providing a description of Yan Guang's appearance and physical attributes.

后齐国上言，有一男子披羊裘钓泽中。
后来齐国上书说，有一位男子，披着羊皮在沼泽中钓鱼。
Later, a letter from Qi State noted that there was a man in the area who dressed in sheep skin and fished in a swamp.

帝疑其光，乃备安车玄熏遣使聘之。
皇帝怀疑是严光，就备了安车、玄熏，派使者聘请严光。
The emperor suspected the man might be Yan Guang. He prepared a small one-horse chariot and an honorable black-and-red garment, and sent an envoy with an invitation for Yan Guang.

三反而后至。
使者去了三次，严光才来。
The envoy visited Yan Guang three times and Yan Guang finally accepted the invitation.

舍于北军，给床褥，太官朝夕进膳。
光武帝让他住在北军，供给床褥，太官早晚进餐。
Emperor Guangwu invited him to stay with the Northern Army, providing him with bedding. A provisioner would host him, providing meals both day and night.

司徒侯霸与光素旧，遣使奉书。
司徒侯霸与严光是老朋友，派人送去书信。
Minister of Education Hou Bao and Yan Guang were old friends, so Hou Bao sent a courier to deliver a letter to Yan Guang.

使人因谓光曰：“公闻先生至，区区欲即诣造，迫于典司，是以不获。愿因日暮自屈语言。”
使者就对严光说：“侯公听说先生来了，心里想马上来拜访，但因有职守，所以不能亲自来。希望你在夜晚空闲的时候，委屈一下，去他那里谈谈。”
The courier said to Yan Guang, "Minister Hou has heard that Master Yan has come, and he really wants to visit you immediately. But, because of his many duties, he cannot come in person. He hopes that, even if inconvenient, you might visit him for a chat one night when you are available."

光不答，乃投札与之，口授曰：“君房足下：位至鼎足，甚善。怀仁辅义天下悦，阿谀顺旨要领绝。”
严光没有回答，投了简札给使者，口授说：“君房足下：官至司徒，很好。心怀仁义，天下人就会喜悦，一味阿谀顺从就不行。”
Yan Guang did not reply but wrote a brief note and gave it to the carrier. He recited the note aloud: "Honorable Junfang, you have successfullyachieved the rank of Minister of Education.It is wonderful.If your heart is full  of benevolence  and righteousness,people will be pleased.However,if you only know to fawn upon the emperor,you should be beheaded."

霸得书封奏之。帝笑曰：“狂奴故态也!”车驾即日幸其馆。
一味阿谀,皇帝就该杀头。”侯霸得到回信，封好上报给皇帝。皇帝笑着说：“这个狂家伙还是老脾气!”皇帝当天就到严光住的客馆来。
 Once Hou Bao read the message, he re-sealed it and submitted it to the emperor. The emperor said with a smile, "This mad man's temperament is still the same." That day, the emperor visited Yan Guang's residence.

光卧不起，帝即其卧所抚光腹曰：“咄咄子陵!不可相助为理邪?”光又眠不应。
严光躺着不起来，皇帝就到他的床边摸着严光的肚皮说：“子陵啊，不能帮我治理国家吗?”严光又睡下不回答。
But Yan Guang lay in bed and did not get up. The emperor moved close to the edge of the bed, patted Yan's belly and said, "Ziling, why don't you assist me in governing the country?" Yan Guang continued sleeping and did not answer.

良久，乃张目熟视曰：“昔唐尧著德，巢父洗耳，士故有志，何至相迫乎?”
过了好久，他才睁开眼睛端详着光武帝，说：“从前唐尧以政治道德著称，但巢父洗耳不愿听到世俗之事，人各有志，何苦相逼呢?”
After a while, he opened his eyes, stared at Emperor Guangwu, and said, "In ancient times, Emperor Yao was well-known for his virtuous governance, but Chaofu washed his ears and did not want to hear a thing from the mundane world. Each one of us has our own path to follow, why force one another?"

帝曰：“子陵，我竟不能下汝邪?”于是升舆叹息而去。
皇帝说：“子陵啊，我难道真的不能使你屈服我吗?”于是登车叹息离开了。
The emperor said, "Alas! Ziling, I really can't persuade you, can I?" Thus, the emperor mounted his chariot, heaved a deep sigh, and left.

复引光入，论道旧故，相对累日。帝从容问光曰：“朕何如昔时?”
光武又召严光进宫，谈论以前的事情，面对面谈了一天。皇帝从容地问严光：“我比过去怎么样?”
Later, Emperor Guangwu invited Yan Guang to the palace. Face to face, they talked about the good old days for an entire day. The emperor leisurely asked Yan Guang, "What do you think of me now?"

对曰：“陛下差增于往。”因共偃卧，光以足加帝腹上。
严光回答：“陛下比过去稍微胖了一点。”于是一起睡觉了，严光把脚放在皇帝的肚子上。
Yan Guang replied, "Your Majesty has put on some weight." Then, they lay down and slept. Yan Guang put his legs on the emperor's belly.

明日，太史奏客星犯御坐甚急。帝笑曰：“朕故人严子陵共卧耳。”
第二天，太史上奏说天上有客星冒犯帝座很紧急。皇帝笑曰：“是我跟老朋友严子陵在一起睡觉。”
The next day, the Grand Astrologer submitted a report, saying it was an urgent issue. There was a guest star in the sky offending the throne. The emperor laughed and said, "That was just my old friend Yan Ziling, sharing my bed."

除为谏议大夫，不屈。乃耕于富春山。后人名其钓处为严陵濑。
任命严光为谏议大夫，严光不肯接受，于是到富春山从事农耕。后人将他钓鱼的地方命名为严陵濑。
The emperor appointed Yan Guang as Grand Master of Remonstrance, but Yan Guang did not accept. Instead, he went to Mount Fuchun to work on a farm. Later generations named the place where Yan had fished "Yan Ling Rapids."

建武十七年复特征，不至。年八十，终于家。帝伤惜之，诏下郡县赐钱百万，谷千斛。
建武十七年，皇帝又专门征召他，他不来。八十岁时，在家中去世。皇帝哀伤惋惜，下诏命所在郡县赐给他家一百万钱、一千斛谷。
In the seventeenth year of the Jianwu era, the emperor once again summoned him, but he still declined. He died at home at the age of eighty. The emperor felt very sad. He issued an edict ordering local commandery officials to grant Yan Guang's family one million in coin and one thousand hu of grains.