董卓字仲颖，陇西临洮人也。性粗猛有谋，少尝游羌中，尽与豪帅相结。后归耕于野，诸豪帅有来从之者，卓为杀耕牛与共宴乐
董卓字仲颍，陇西郡临洮县人。性格粗猛有谋略。年轻时曾经游于羌中，跟羌人的首相结交。后来董卓回家耕作，各羌人首领有来到他家看望的，他为此杀了耕牛，跟他们一起宴饮作乐
Dong Zhuo, style named Zhongying, was a native of Lintao District in Longxi Commandery. He was an astute and resourceful man with a bold and unconstrained personality. When he was young, he had traveled to the Qiang areas. He associated frequently with the chieftains of the Qiang tribes. He later returned home to be a farmer. Once, when the chieftains of the Qiangs visited him at home, Dong Zhuo killed his own herding cows to treat them to a meal of beef. He prepared wine and food to entertain them.

豪帅感其意，归相敛得杂畜千余头以遗之，由是以健侠知名。为州兵马掾，常徼守塞下。卓膂力过人，双带两鞬，左右驰射，为羌胡所畏。
羌人首领对他的盛情很感动，回去后相互收罗了杂畜一千多头送给他，因此董卓以刚勇侠义出名。他担任州的兵马掾，常守卫在边塞。董卓体力过人，双臂带两个弓袋，骑马左右开弓，羌胡很畏惧他
Since then, Dong Zhuo was known for his robust and chivalrous conduct. He served as Cavalry Clerk in the region, so he often stayed at and guarded the frontier. Dong Zhuo's arm-strength exceeded anyone else's. He often carried two bags of bows on each arm, and shot with both hands alternatively in quick succession while riding on his horse. For this reason, the Qiangs were afraid of him.
桓帝末，以六郡良家子为羽林郎，从中郎将张奂为军司马，共击汉阳叛羌，破之。
桓帝末年，董卓以六郡良家子的身份担任羽林郎，跟随中郎将张奂为军司马，一起进击汉阳的叛羌，打败他们。
In the final year of Emperor Huan's reign, Dong Zhuo was appointed Gentleman of the Palace Guard. He served under Leader of Court Gentlemen Zhang Huan as Division Commander. Together they attacked the rebellious Qiangs in Hanyang and defeated them.

拜郎中，赐缣九千匹
被任命为郎中，赏赐九千匹缣。
Therefore, Dong Zhuo was appointed Gentleman of the Interior and rewarded with nine thousand rolls of fine silk.

卓曰：“为者则己，有者则士。”乃悉分与吏兵，无所留
董卓说：“功劳可以归我自己，赏赐则要分给士兵。”于是将赏赐全部分给将士，自己没有留下一点。
Dong Zhuo said, "I would attribute the success to myself, but the rewards should go to the soldiers." Therefore, he distributed all the rewards of fine silk to his soldiers and kept nothing for himself.

稍迁西域戊己校尉，坐事免
后来他升为西域戊己校尉，因事免官。
Gradually, he was promoted to the position of Commandant of the Center of the Western Regions, which post he was later removed from.

后为并州刺史、河东太守
后来担任并州刺史、河东太守。
Then he served as Regional Inspector of Bingzhou and Governor of Hedong.

中平元年，拜东中郎将，持节代卢植击张角于下曲阳，军败，抵罪
中平元年(公元184年)，担任东中郎将，持符节，接替卢植在下曲阳县进攻张角，军败受罚。
In the first year of the Zhongping era (184), he served as Eastern Section Leader of Court Gentlemen with a token of authority. When he replaced Lu Zhi to attack Zhang Jiao at Xiaquyang District, he lost the battle and was punished.

其冬，北地先零羌及枪罕、河关群盗反叛
那年冬天，北地郡的先零羌以及抱罕、河关群盗反叛。
That winter, the Xianling Qiang of Beidi Commandery, as well as two bandit groups from Fuhan and Heguan, rebelled.

遂共立湟中义从胡北宫伯玉、李文侯为将军，杀护羌校尉泠徵
他们共同拥立归顺湟中的胡人北宫伯玉、李文侯为将军，杀了护羌校尉泠徵。
These three groups supported Beigong Boyu and Li Wenhou, Hu barbarians from Huangzhong, as generals and killed Ling Zheng, Protector Commandant of Qiang.

伯玉等乃劫致金城人边章、韩遂，使专任军政，共杀金城太守陈懿，攻烧州郡
北宫伯玉等人劫持了金城人边章、韩遂，让他们专门管理军政，一起杀了金城太守陈懿，攻烧州郡。
Beigong Boyu and his fellows kidnapped Bian Zhang and Han Sui from Jincheng and asked them to manage military affairs. Together, they killed Chen Yi, Governor of Jincheng, and attacked and burned down various places in the region.

明年春，将数万骑入寇三辅，侵逼园陵，托诛宦官为名
第二年春天，他率领几万骑兵侵犯三辅地区，侵逼园陵，假托诛杀宦官的名义。
In the spring of the following year, the Qiangs led tens of thousands of mounted troops to invade the Three Metropolis Areas. They advanced on the tombs of previous Han emperors under the pretext of eliminating eunuchs.

诏以卓为中郎将，副左车骑将军皇甫嵩征之
皇帝下诏以董卓为中郎将，作为左车骑将军皇甫嵩的副手讨伐他们。
Therefore, the emperor ordered Dong Zhuo to be Leader of Court Gentlemen and to serve as aide to Left General of Chariot and Horse Huangfu Song to attack them.

众军败退，唯卓全师而还，屯于扶风。封釐乡侯，邑千户。
各军败退，只有董卓全师而回，驻扎在扶风，封釐乡侯，食邑千户。
All other troops were defeated and retreated. Only Dong Zhuo's troops returned with banners flying. They encamped at Fufeng. Dong Zhuo was given the title of Marquis of Li Township with a fiefdom of one thousand households.

六年，征卓为少府，不肯就。
六年(公元189年)，皇帝征召董卓担任少府，董卓不肯接受。
In the sixth year (189), the emperor summoned Dong Zhuo and appointed him Chamberlain of Palace Revenues, but Dong Zhuo declined.

及灵帝寝疾，玺书拜卓为并州牧，令以兵属皇甫嵩。
到灵帝病重的时候，下玺书任命董卓担任并州牧，命令他把部队交给皇甫嵩。
When Emperor Ling fell seriously ill, he issued a decree with an imperial seal appointing Dong Zhuo as Governor of Bingzhou Commandery and ordered him to submit his troops to Huangfu Song.

卓复上书言曰：“臣既无老谋，又无壮事，天恩误加，掌戌十年。士卒大小，相狎弥久，恋臣畜养之恩，为臣奋一旦之命乞将之北州，效力边垂。”
董卓又上书说：“我既无好的谋略，也没有突出的政绩，皇帝给我大恩，管理军队十年。士兵无论大小相互亲近已经很久了，他们怀念我对他们的畜养之恩，愿意为我拼命。我请求带他们到北州，效力边疆。”
Dong Zhuo submitted another letter to the emperor and said, “Neither do I have good strategies, nor do I have outstanding achievements. Your Majesty has bestowed a great favor on me, permitting me to manage my troops for ten years. No matter the rank of a soldier, we have been close for a long time. They are grateful to me for how I have treated and supported them, so they are willing to sacrifice their lives on my behalf. I beg Your Majesty to allow me to take them to the northern regions to serve at the frontier.”

于是驻兵河东，以观时变。
于是在河东驻扎部队，以静观时局的变化。
Therefore, he stationed his troops to the east of the Yellow River and waited calmly to observe the changes the times would bring.

及帝崩，大将军何进、司隶校尉袁绍谋诛阉宦，而太后不许，乃私呼卓将兵入朝，以胁太后。
等到灵帝去世，大将军何进、司隶校尉袁绍合谋诛杀宦官，而太后不同意，于是私下叫董卓带兵入朝，以威逼太后。
After Emperor Ling passed away, Grand General He Jin and Metropolitan Commandant Yuan Shao plotted to kill the eunuchs, but the Empress Dowager opposed it. They secretly summoned Dong Zhuo to lead his troops into the capital to threaten the Empress Dowager.

卓得召，即时就道，并上书曰：“中常侍张让等窃幸承宠，浊乱海内。臣闻扬汤止沸，莫若去薪；溃痈虽痛，胜于内食。”
董卓得到邀请，即刻上路，并且上书说：“中常侍张让等人偷得皇帝宠爱，使国家混乱。我听说扬汤止沸，不如釜底抽薪；恶疮破了虽然痛，但比病情内窜好得多。”
When Dong Zhuo received the summons, he immediately set out and wrote a letter saying, “Palace Attendant-in-ordinary Zhang Rang and his fellows have enjoyed the emperor's favor, but they have caused chaos across the realm. I have heard that to stop water from boiling, it is better to remove the firewood than to skim off the water; when an ulcer breaks, it is painful, but it is better than letting it fester internally.”


昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，以逐君侧之恶人，今臣辄鸣锺鼓如洛阳，请收让等，以清奸秽。
以前赵鞅兴起晋阳之师，以驱逐国君身边的恶人。现在我也鸣着钟鼓到洛阳，请求抓张让等人，以清除奸邪污秽的小人。
In the past, Zhao Yang led an army from Jinyang to drive away the evil men surrounding his king. Now, I am also beating the drums and bells to Luoyang. I will request to capture Zhang Rang and his fellows, so that we can rid ourselves of these treacherous and evil people.

卓未至，而何进败。虎贲中郎将袁术乃烧南宫，欲讨宦官。
董卓还没到，而何进已经失败，虎贲中郎将袁术于是烧了南宫，想讨伐宦官。
While Dong Zhuo was on his way to Luoyang, He Jin's plan failed. Leader of Court Gentlemen Brave-as-tigers, Yuan Shu, then burned down the Southern Palace, intending to attack the eunuchs.

而中常侍段珪等，劫少帝及陈留王夜走小平津。
而中常侍段珪等人劫持少帝及陈留王趁夜逃往小平津关。
However, Palace Attendant-in-ordinary Duan Gui and others kidnapped Emperor Shao and King of Chenliu at night, taking them to Xiaoping Ford.

卓远见火起，引兵急进，未明到城西，闻少帝在北芒，因往奉迎。
董卓远远看见火起，带兵急速前进，天没亮到达城西，听说少帝在北芒山，于是前往奉迎。
When Dong Zhuo saw the fires rising from a distance, he advanced his troops at full speed. Before dawn, they arrived at the west side of the city. Hearing that Emperor Shao was at Beimang Mountain, Dong Zhuo went there to welcome him.

帝见卓将兵卒至，恐怖涕泣，卓与言不能辞对；与陈留王语，遂及祸乱之事。
少帝看见董卓带兵突然到达，吓得哭了。董卓跟他说话，他不怎么能回答；跟陈留王说话，他就说到这些祸乱的事。
When Emperor Shao saw Dong Zhuo and his troops suddenly arrive, he was so frightened that he cried. Dong Zhuo tried to converse with him, but he could not answer. When Dong Zhuo spoke with the King of Chenliu, the King was able to describe the events that had occurred.

卓以王为贤，且为董太后所养，卓自以与太后同族，有废立意。
董卓认为陈留王比少帝贤明，而且又是董太后抚养大的，董卓自认为与太后同族，有了废少帝立陈留王的想法。
Dong Zhuo believed that the King of Chenliu was wiser than Emperor Shao and had been raised by Empress Dowager, who was of the same clan as Dong Zhuo himself. Therefore, he came up with the idea of dethroning Emperor Shao and placing the King of Chenliu on the throne.

初，卓之入也，步骑不过三千，自嫌兵少，恐不为远近所服。
早先时候，董卓进入洛阳，步兵骑兵不超过三千人，自己嫌自己兵少，怕远近各地不服从他。
Not long before, Dong Zhuo arrived in Luoyang with no more than three thousand foot soldiers and horsemen. He was afraid that people from the various areas would not obey him because of the small size of his troops.

率四五日辄夜潜出军近营，明旦，乃大陈旌鼓而还，以为西兵复至，洛中无知者。
于是经常过四五天就趁夜暗中出军到附近的营地，第二天一早就大张旗鼓回来，人们以为西部军队又到了，洛阳没有人知道这种情况。
Therefore, every four or five days, he secretly led his troops out to nearby camps at night. In the morning, they would ride back with waving flags and loudly beating drums. Everyone thought that fresh troops from the west had arrived. No one in Luoyang knew the truth.

寻而何进及弟苗先所领部曲，皆归于卓。卓又使吕布杀执金吾丁原，而并其众，卓兵士大盛。
不久何进及弟弟何苗先前所统领的部众都归董卓管理，董卓又派吕布杀了执金吾丁原而并吞了他的部众。董卓兵士大盛。
Not long after, the troops that once belonged to He Jin and his younger brother He Miao were soon controlled by Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo then sent Lv Bu to kill the Chamberlain for the Imperial Insignia Ding Yuan. After annexing Ding Yuan’s troops, Dong Zhuo’s military power became strong and splendid.

乃讽朝廷策免司空刘弘而自代之。
于是授意朝廷下策书罢免司空刘弘而自己接替他。
He asked the court to issue an edict to remove Liu Hong from the position of Minister of Works, and he himself took over this post.

遂胁太后，策废少帝，曰：“皇帝在丧，无人子之心，威仪不类人君，今废为弘农王。”
于是董卓威胁太后，下策废掉少帝，说：“皇帝在服丧期间，没有孝子之心，威仪也不像做皇帝的样子，现在废为弘农王。”
He later threatened Empress Dowager, pressing her to issue an announcement to dethrone Emperor Shao. He said, “While Emperor Shao was in the mourning period, he did not act like a son. His manner and demeanor are unseemly for an emperor. Therefore, we should depose him and designate him King of Hongnong.”

乃立陈留王，是为献帝。
于是立了陈留王，这就是献帝。
He got the King of Chenliu to ascend the throne, who was later known as Emperor Xian in Chinese history.

又议太后蹙迫永乐太后，至令忧死，逆妇姑之礼，无孝顺之节，迁于永安宫，遂以弑崩。
又说太后逼迫永乐太后，使后者因忧惧而死，违背媳妇与婆婆之间的礼制，没有孝顺之节操，于是把她迁居到永安宫，然后又派人杀害了她。
He again accused Empress Dowager Deng of forcing her will upon Empress Dowager Yongle, who consequently died from melancholy and depression. Dong Zhuo charged that her actions violated the customs and rites a daughter-in-law must uphold in relation to her mother-in-law, and that she lacked the virtue of filial piety. Accordingly, Dong Zhuo moved Empress Dowager to the Palace of Yongan, where she was later killed.


卓迁太尉，领前将军事，加节传、斧钺、虎贲，更封郿侯。
董卓升任太尉，兼任前将军职务，加节传、斧钺、虎贲，改封郿侯。
Dong Zhuo was promoted to the position of Defender-in-chief. He held a concurrent post of General of the Front, combined with a token of special authority as well as battle-axes and halberds. He also received the title Marquis of Mei.

卓乃与司徒黄琬、司空杨彪，俱带铁锈诣阙上书，追理陈蕃、窦武及诸党人，以从人望。
董卓于是与司徒黄琬、司空杨彪，都带着刑具到皇宫上书，为陈蕃、窦武及各党锢案中的人平反，以顺应民心。
Dong Zhuo, together with Minister of Education Huang Wan and Minister of Works Yang Biao, wore the instruments of punishment to the palace and submitted a letter to the emperor. In order to comply with popular sentiment, these three redressed wrongs committed in the cases of Chen Fan, Dou Wu, and various other political factions.

于是悉复蕃等爵位，擢用子孙。
于是全部恢复陈蕃等人的爵位，擢用他们的子孙为官。
The emperor reinstated Chen Fan and his associates, resuming their titles and posts. He appointed their descendants to official positions.

寻进卓为相国，入朝不趋，剑履上殿，封母为池阳君，置丞令。
不久董卓就进位为相国，上朝不用小跑，可以带剑穿鞋上殿。封他的母亲为池阳君，为她设置令丞。
Not long after, Dong Zhuo was promoted to Counselor-in-chief. When he had a court audience with the emperor, he did not need to hurry in small steps. He could bring his sword and wear his shoes in the palace hall. The emperor also honored Dong Zhuo's mother with the title Chiyang Lord and set up administrators for her.

是时洛中贵戚，室第相望，金帛财产，家家殷积。
这个时候，洛阳城中到处是汉朝贵戚的府邸，金帛财产，家家殷积。
During this period, there were many powerful and honorable family mansions in Luoyang city, with gold, fine silk, and abundant household wealth in every home.

卓纵放兵士，突其庐舍，淫略妇女，剽虏资物，谓之“搜牢”。
董卓放纵士兵，强行进入他们的房子，奸淫抢掠妇女，抢劫钱财物品，称为“搜军粮”。
Dong Zhuo was indulgent with his soldiers. He forced them to enter the wealthy households, where they raped and kidnapped women, stole money and goods. They called these actions “collecting military supplies.”

人情崩恐，不保朝夕。
人心恐慌，有朝夕不保的感觉。
Everyone was full of dread and fear. They felt a sense of insecurity—knowing that though they might be alive in the morning, they could end up dead by evening.

及何后葬，开文陵，卓悉取藏中珍物。
等到何皇后下葬的时候，董卓打开文陵，取出陵墓中全部珍宝物品。
When Empress He was buried, Dong Zhuo even opened the tomb of Emperor Ling and took away all the treasures and valuable objects from it.

又奸乱公主，妻略宫人，虐刑滥罚，睚眦必死。
又奸淫公主和宫女，使用酷刑滥罚，一点小罪就被处死。
He raped the princesses and palace maids. He employed cruel and excessive punishments—even when a person committed a minor mistake, they would be sentenced to death.

群僚内外，莫能自固。
内外百官没人感到安全。
None of the officials, whether in the court or stationed outside, felt secure at all.

卓尝遣军至阳城，时人会于社下，悉令就斩之。
董卓曾经派军队到阳城，当时人们都在社下聚会，他命令全部杀死。
Once, Dong Zhuo even ordered his troops to Yangcheng. At that time, people were gathering at the village shrine, and he commanded all of them to be executed.


驾其车重，载其妇女，以头系车辕，歌呼而还。
驾驶着他们的车辆，装载着妇女，将头颅挂在车辕上，歌唱呼叫而回。
His soldiers not only confiscated these people's carriages, stuffed them with loads of kidnapped women, but also hung the people's heads on the shafts. They returned to Luoyang singing and shouting.

又坏五铢钱，更铸小钱，悉取洛阳及长安铜人、钟虞、飞廉、铜马之属以充铸焉。
董卓又废掉五铢钱，改铸小钱，搜罗洛阳及长安的铜人、钟虞、飞廉、铜马这些东西，用来熔化铸钱。
Dong Zhuo also destroyed the so-called “Wuzhu” coin, and made small coins instead. From Zhongyu and Feilian, in both Luoyang and Chang’an, he confiscated all the bronze statues of human beings and horses. He melted them and turned them into coins.

故货贱物贵，谷石数万，又钱无轮郭文章，不便人用。
因此通货膨胀，一石谷达到几万钱，这些小钱又没有轮廓和文字图案，不方便使用。
This action caused such an inflation that one bushel of grain now cost tens of thousands in copper cash. Besides, the small coins were very inconvenient to use since they had no fixed contour or patterns.

卓素闻天下同疾阉官诛杀忠良，及其在事，虽行无道，而犹忍性矫情，擢用群士。
董卓一向听说天下人都痛恨宦官诛杀忠良，等到他掌握了朝政，虽然所行无道，还是矫饰性情，擢用了很多士人。
Dong Zhuo had always heard that everyone in the world hated the fact that eunuchs killed good and loyal officials. Once he gained authority over imperial affairs, he attempted to restrain himself. He pretended to be benevolent, though his actions had been merciless. He employed and promoted many people from the literati.

乃任吏部尚书汉阳周秘、侍中汝南伍琼、尚书郑公业、长史何颗等。
任命了吏部尚书汉阳周秘、侍中汝南伍琼、尚书郑公业、长史何题等人。
He appointed Zhou Mi from Hanyang as Imperial Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel. In addition, he appointed Wu Qiong of Runan to the post of Palace Attendant, Zheng Gongye to the post of Imperial Secretary, and He Ke to the post of Aide.

以处士荀爽为司空，其染党锢者陈纪、韩融之徒，皆为列卿。
处士荀爽担任司空，列名党锢案的陈纪、韩融这些人，都任命为列卿。
He employed Xun Shuang, a hermit, as Minister of Works. He appointed people who were enlisted among political factions—such as Chen Ji and Han Rong—to an array of positions as chief officers of the household.

幽滞之士，多所显拔。
隐居或者处在下位的士大夫，很多都得到选拔进用。
Those who were hermits or held lower-ranking positions were also selected and promoted.

以尚书韩馥为冀州刺史，侍中刘岱为兖州刺史，陈留孔仙为豫州刺史，颍川张咨为南阳太守。
用尚书韩馥为冀州刺史，侍中刘岱为兖州刺史，陈留人孔仙为豫州刺史，颍川人张咨为南阳太守。
For example, Imperial Secretary Han Fu as Regional Inspector of Jizhou, Palace Attendant Liu Dai as Regional Inspector of Yanzhou, Kong Xian from Chenliu as Regional Inspector of Yuzhou, and Zhang Zi from Yingchuan as Governor of Nanyang.

卓所亲爱，并不处显职，但将校而已。
董卓自己所亲近喜欢的人，都不在显要的位置上，只是担任些将校而已。
Dong Zhuo did not appoint any of his closest or most favored colleagues to prominent positions. They served only as leaders or construction foremen.


初平元年，馥等到官，与袁绍之徒十余人，各兴义兵同盟讨卓，而伍琼、周秘阴为内主。
初平元年(公元190年),韩馥等人上任，与袁绍这些人共十几个人，各自发起义师，结为同盟讨伐董卓，而伍琼、周秘暗中作为内应。
In the first year of the Chuping era (190), Han Fu and others took office. These individuals, along with Yuan Shao and more than ten others, formed an alliance. They launched insurrectionary armies to rebel against Dong Zhuo, with Wu Qiong and Zhou Mi coordinating from within.

初，灵帝末，黄巾余党郭太等复起西河白波谷，转寇太原，遂破河东，百姓流转三辅，号为白波贼，众十余万。
早先时候，灵帝末年，黄巾的余党郭太等人又在西河白波谷起兵，辗转侵犯太原，于是攻破河东，百姓流亡三辅地区，郭太部队被称为“白波贼”，部众有十多万人。
During the last year of Emperor Ling's reign (189), the remaining cliques of the Yellow Turbans, including Guo Tai as well as others, had resumed their uprising in the Baipo Valley of Xihe. They moved forward to attack Taiyuan and finally broke through, destroying Hedong, the people of which area then fled to the Three Metropolis Areas. Thus, Guo Tai's troops were called the "Bandits of Baipo." All together they had more than one hundred thousand members.

卓遣中郎将牛辅击之，不能却。
董卓派遣中郎将牛辅进攻，不能打退他们。
Dong Zhuo ordered Leader of Court Gentlemen Niu Fu to attack the bandits, but without any success.

及闻东方兵起，惧，乃鸩杀弘农王，欲徙都长安。
又听说东部地区也起兵了，恐惧，于是毒杀了弘农王，想迁都长安。
Dong Zhuo also heard of an uprising in the east, and he was frightened by this. He killed King of Hongnong, intending to move the capital to Chang’an.

会公卿议，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪廷争不能得，而伍琼、周秘又固谏之。
招集公卿商议，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪在朝廷上与董卓争论没能成功，而伍琼、周秘又坚决劝谏他。
He gathered dukes and ministers to discuss the matter. Defender-in-chief Huang Wan and Minister of Education Yang Biao argued with Dong Zhuo but were not successful. Wu Qiong and Zhou Mi also pressed him, using both persuasion and admonishment.

卓因大怒曰：“卓初入朝，二子劝用善士，故相从；而诸君到官，举兵相图。此二君卖卓，卓何用相负!”
董卓于是大怒说：“我刚入朝的时候，你们两个劝我选用善士，所以听从了你们，而他们一上任，就举兵对付我。这肯定是你们两个出卖我，我哪一点亏待了你们?”
Dong Zhuo became very angry. He said, “When I first came to the court, you both suggested that I must use these capable people, and I listened to you. Once they assumed their posts, they called out the troops against me. It must be the two of you who have betrayed me. Have I ever treated you unfairly or unkindly?”

遂斩琼、秘。
于是杀了伍琼、周秘。
He then killed Wu Qiong and Zhou Mi.

旋亦悔之，故表彪、琬为光禄大夫。
很快又后悔了，因此上书表彰杨彪、黄琬二人，当了光禄大夫。
But soon he regretted it and appointed Yang Biao and Huang Wan as Superior Dukes.


于是迁天子西都。
董卓于是挟持天子迁都长安。
And then he seized the emperor and moved the capital to Chang’an.

初，长安遭赤眉之乱，宫室营寺焚灭无余，是时唯有高庙、京兆府舍，遂便时幸焉，后移未央宫。
早先时候，长安遭到赤眉军之乱，宫室营署焚烧毁灭无余，这时只有高庙、京兆府衙门还在，于是皇帝便常常住在这里，后来迁到未央宫。
Earlier, Chang’an had suffered from the disorder of the Red Eyebrow Uprising, so the palaces and offices were burned down. Currently, only some royal family temples and a yamen were left in the capital. Therefore, the emperor stayed in the yamen. Later the emperor was moved to Weiyang Palace.

于是，尽徙洛阳人数百万口于长安，步骑驱蹙，更相蹈藉，饥饿寇掠，积尸盈路。
董卓于是把洛阳几百万人迁到长安，步兵骑兵驱赶他们，移民们相互践踏，又饥饿又要遭受抢掠，满路都是尸体。
Dong Zhuo also forced several million people to move from Luoyang to Chang’an. Pushed and rushed by foot soldiers and cavalrymen, these people trampled each other. They were assaulted and starved as well. Dead bodies lay everywhere on the roads.

卓自屯留毕圭苑中，悉烧宫庙官府居家，二百里内无复孑遗。又使吕布发诸帝陵及公卿以下冢墓，收其珍宝。
董卓自己驻扎在毕圭苑中，把宫庙官府民居全部烧了，二百里内没有人，又派吕布挖了各个皇帝的陵墓，以及公卿以下官员的坟墓，取用墓中的珍宝。
Dong Zhuo installed himself at an encampment in Bigui Garden. He burned all of the imperial halls, temples, official and civilian residences to the ground. Nobody was to live within two hundred li of the area. He then sent Lv Bu not only to dig out the tombs of previous emperors, but also those of dukes and ministers. He confiscated any and all treasure found in the tombs.

时长沙太守孙坚亦率豫州诸郡兵讨卓。卓先遣将徐荣、李蒙四出虏掠。荣遇坚于梁，与战，破坚，生禽颍川太守李旻，亨之。
当时，长沙太守孙坚也率领豫州各路部队讨伐董卓。董卓先派遣将军徐荣、李蒙四处抢掠。徐荣在梁城遇到孙坚，与孙坚开战，打败了孙坚，活捉了颍川太守李旻，把他煮杀了。
During that period, Governor of Changsha Sun Jian also led various troops from Yuzhou to attack Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo first sent Generals Xu Rong and Li Meng to go about raiding and plundering. Xu Rong encountered Sun Jian at Liangcheng. He attacked and defeated him. Xu Rong captured Governor of Yingchuan Li Min alive but then killed him by boiling.

卓所得义兵士卒，皆以布缠裹，倒立于地，热膏灌杀之。
董卓抓获的起义部队的士兵，都用布把他们缠裹，倒立在地，用热油灌杀他们。
When Dong Zhuo captured soldiers from the insurrectionary armies, he would wrap them in cloth, hang them upside down, and pour hot oil on them in order to kill them.

时河内太守王匡屯兵河阳津，将以图卓，卓遣疑兵挑战，而潜使锐卒从小平津。
当时，河内太守王匡在河阳津驻扎军队，想要对付董卓。董卓派遣疑兵挑战，而暗中派精锐士兵从小平津渡过津北。
At that time, Governor of Henei Wang Kuang stationed his troops at Heyang Ford to prepare for the attack on Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo deployed some troops to mislead the enemy, pretending to attack them. Secretly, he sent skilled sharp-shooters across Xiaoping Ford.


过津北破之，死者略尽。
董卓的军队越过小平津北岸，将敌军击溃，几乎全部杀光。
Dong Zhuo's soldiers defeated the enemy to the north of the Xiaoping Ford, killing nearly all of them.

明年，孙坚收合散卒，进屯梁县之阳人，卓遣将胡轸、吕布攻之。布与轸不相能，军中自惊恐，士卒散乱。
一年之后，孙坚集合散兵，前进驻扎在梁县的阳人。董卓派遣将领胡轸、吕布进攻他们。吕布与胡轸关系不和，军中自相惊恐，士兵奔散混乱。
One year later, Sun Jian collected the scattered soldiers and stationed them at Yangren Village in Liang District. Dong Zhuo sent troops led by Hu Zhen and Lv Bu to attack them. However, Lv Bu did not get along well with Hu Zhen, causing fear and confusion in the army; the troops were scattered.

坚追击之，轸、布败走。卓遣将李傕诣坚求和，坚拒绝不受，进军大谷，距洛九十里。
孙坚追击他们，胡轸、吕布败逃。董卓派遣将军李傕向孙坚求和，孙坚拒绝不接受，前进驻军在大谷，离洛阳九十里。
Sun Jian chased and attacked them, resulting in Hu Zhen and Lv Bu’s defeat and flight. Dong Zhuo then sent General Li Jue to plead for peace, but Sun Jian refused. Sun Jian advanced and stationed his troops at Dagu, ninety li from Luoyang.

卓自出与坚战于诸陵墓间，卓败走，却屯黾池，聚兵于陕。坚进洛阳宣阳城门，更击吕布，布复破走。
董卓亲自出马与孙坚在各个陵墓之间交战，董卓败逃，退却到黾池，在陕聚集士兵。孙坚进入洛阳宣阳城门，再进击吕布，吕布又败逃。
Dong Zhuo personally led his troops to fight Sun Jian among the imperial tombs, but was defeated and retreated to Yingchi, gathering soldiers in Shan. Sun Jian entered Luoyang through the Xuanyang Gate and attacked Lv Bu again, who was defeated and fled once more.

坚乃埽除宗庙，平塞诸陵，分兵出函谷关，至新安、黾池间，以截卓后。
孙坚于是打扫宗庙，把挖开的皇陵埋好，分兵出函谷关，到达新安、黾池之间，以断绝董卓后路。
Sun Jian then cleaned up the imperial temples, restored the tombs that had been desecrated, divided his forces, and moved out through Hangu Pass to the area between Xin’an and Yingchi, aiming to block Dong Zhuo’s retreat.

卓谓长史刘艾曰：“关东诸将数败矣，无能为也。唯孙坚小戆，诸将军宜慎之。”
董卓对长史刘艾说：“关东各将败了好几次，没什么大作为了。只有孙坚稍微厉害一点，各位将军要小心啊。”
Dong Zhuo said to his aide Liu Ai, “The generals in Guandong have been defeated many times and are of no great ability. Only Sun Jian is slightly formidable; all of you must be cautious.”

乃使东中郎将董越屯黾池，中郎将段煨屯华阴，中郎将牛辅屯安邑，其余中郎将、校尉布在诸县，以御山东多都。
于是派东中郎将董越驻扎黾池，中郎将段煨驻扎华阴，中郎将牛辅驻扎安邑，其余中郎将和校尉分布到各县，以抵御山东的起义部队。
Then he ordered Eastern Section Leader of Court Gentlemen Dong Yue to station at Yingchi, Leader of Court Gentlemen Duan Wei at Huayin, and Leader of Court Gentlemen Niu Fu at Anyi. The remaining Commandants and Leaders of Court Gentlemen were stationed in various districts to resist the insurrectionary army from Shandong.


卓讽朝廷，使光禄勋宣璠持节拜卓为太师，位在诸侯王上。
董卓唆使朝廷，让光禄勋宣璠持符节，以拜董卓为太师，地位高于诸侯王。
Dong Zhuo convinced the court to have Chamberlain Xuan Fan carry a token of authority to appoint him Grand Preceptor, a rank above the feudal marquises.

乃引还长安，百官迎路拜揖。
他于是率军返回长安，百官在路上迎接并行礼。
He then returned to Chang'an with his forces, and the officials greeted and bowed to him along the road.

卓遂僭拟车服，乘金华青盖，爪画两幡，时人号“竿摩车”，言其服饰近天子也。
董卓因此僭越礼制，驾乘金饰车辇，置青色车盖，车盖有爪形装饰并悬挂两面旌旗，当时人称这种车为“竿摩车”，认为他的仪服近似天子。
Dong Zhuo then usurped imperial style in his carriage and attire, riding in a gold-adorned chariot with a blue canopy decorated with claw motifs and two banners; people called it the "ganmo carriage" because his dress resembled that of the emperor.

以弟旻为左将军，封鄠侯，兄子璜为侍中、中军校尉，皆典兵事。
他任命弟弟董旻为左将军并封为鄠侯，封其兄之子董璜为侍中和中军校尉，皆主管军事事务。
He appointed his brother Dong Min as Left General and made him Marquis of Hu, and made his elder brother's son Dong Huang Palace Attendant and Commandant of the Central Army, all in charge of military affairs.

于是宗族内外，并居列位。
从此董氏宗族内外成员都占据了各类官位。
From then on, members of the Dong clan, inside and outside the family, occupied official positions.

其子孙虽在龁，男皆封侯，女为邑君。
即便他的子孙年幼，男子亦被封为侯爵，女子被封为邑君。
Even his descendants as children were enfeoffed; the males became marquises and the females were made lords of districts.

数与百官置酒宴会，淫乐纵恣乃结垒于长安城东以自居。
他常与百官设宴饮乐，纵情声色，便在长安城东筑起营垒自处。
He frequently held banquets with officials, indulged in debauchery, and built a fortified camp on the east side of Chang'an for his residence.

又筑坞于郿，高厚七丈，号曰“万岁坞”，积谷为三十年储，自云：“事成雄据天下，不成，守此足以毕老。”
他又在郿城筑起高大坚固的堡垒，高七丈，名为“万岁坞”，储粮可供三十年之用，他自言如果能成功则据有天下，若不能则守此以终老。
He also built a fortress at Mei called the "Ten Thousand Years Fort", seven zhang high and thick, storing grain for thirty years; he said if he succeeded he would dominate the realm, if not he could retire here for life.

尝至郿行坞，公卿已下祖道于横门外。
他曾到郿巡视堡垒，公卿以下在横门外列队送行。
Once when he inspected the Mei fortress, dukes and ministers formed a farewell procession outside the transverse gate.

卓施帐幔饮设，诱降北地反者数百人，于坐中杀之。
董卓设帐设宴，诱降了数百名北地叛众，到席中将其杀害。
Dong Zhuo put up tents and feasts to lure several hundred surrendered northerners and killed them at the banquet.

先断其舌，次斩手足，次凿其眼目，以镬煮之，未死者皆在席上翻滚哀号。
他先割断他们的舌头，然后砍掉手足，再挖出眼睛，用大锅煮死，未死者在席上痛苦翻滚哀号。
He first cut off their tongues, then hacked off their hands and feet, gouged out their eyes and boiled them in cauldrons; those not yet dead writhed and wailed at the table.


未及得死，偃转杯案间。会者战栗，亡失匕箸，而卓饮食自若。
参加宴会的人吓得发抖，筷子、勺子都拿不住了，董卓却饮食自若。
Those not yet dead rolled and writhed between cups and tables. The guests trembled so that they dropped their knives and chopsticks, while Dong Zhuo ate and drank as if nothing had happened.

诸将有言语蹉跌，便戮于前。又稍诛关中旧族，陷以叛逆。
各位将领稍有言语失措，便在众前处死。又开始诛杀关中的旧贵族，诬为叛逆。
Whenever any general misspoke, he was executed before the assembly. Dong Zhuo also began killing old aristocratic families in Guanzhong, accusing them of rebellion.

时太史望气，言当有大臣戮死者。卓乃使人诬卫尉张温与袁术交通，遂笞温于市，杀之，以塞天变。
当时太史观测天象，预言将有大臣被杀。董卓便诬陷卫尉张温与袁术勾结，于是在市上鞭打张温并处死，以平息天变的兆象。
The Grand Astrologer read omens and predicted that a high minister would be executed. Dong Zhuo then framed Colonel Zhang Wen for colluding with Yuan Shu, had him whipped in the marketplace, and executed him to dispel the portent.

越骑校尉汝南伍孚，忿卓凶毒，志手刃之，乃朝服怀佩刀以见卓。
越骑校尉汝南人伍孚痛恨董卓的凶残，发誓亲手杀他，于是穿朝服怀刀拜见董卓。
Colonel of the Picked Cavalry Wu Fu of Runan, enraged by Dong Zhuo’s cruelty and determined to kill him, came to see Dong Zhuo in court robes with a knife hidden in his garments.

孚语毕辞去，卓起送至阁，以手抚其背，孚因出刀刺之，不中。
伍孚说完话告辞，董卓起身送他到阁下，用手抚其背，伍孚于是拔刀刺向他，但未刺中。
After speaking, Wu Fu took his leave; Dong Zhuo rose and accompanied him to the pavilion, patting his back. Wu Fu drew his knife and stabbed, but missed.

卓自奋得免，急呼左右执杀之，而大诟曰：“虏欲反耶?”
董卓奋力脱险，急呼左右卫士将其擒杀，大骂道：“你想造反吗?”
Dong Zhuo narrowly escaped, shouted to his guards to seize and kill him, and cursed, “Are you rebelling?”

孚大言曰：“恨不得磔裂奸贼于都市，以谢天地!”言未毕而毙。
伍孚大声喊道：“恨不得在都城将你裂尸示众，以谢天地!”话未说完便被处死。
Wu Fu cried out, “I wish I could tear this traitor limb from limb in the capital to repay Heaven and Earth!” He was killed before he could finish the sentence.

时王允与吕布及仆射士孙瑞谋诛卓。有人书吕字于布上，负而行于市，歌曰：“布乎!”有人告卓者，卓不悟。
当时王允与吕布以及仆射士孙瑞密谋诛杀董卓。有人在布上写“吕”字，背着布在市上走并歌唱“布乎!”有人告诉董卓此事，但董卓未能领会其中含义。
At that time Wang Yun, Lü Bu, and Supervisor Shi Sun Rui conspired to kill Dong Zhuo. Someone wrote the character “吕” on a piece of cloth, carried it through the market and sang, “Bu hu!” A messenger reported this to Dong Zhuo, but he did not grasp the hint.


三年四月，帝疾新愈，大会未央殿。
公元192年四月，皇帝刚刚病愈，在未央殿大会百官。
In the fourth month of the third year (192), having just recovered from an illness, the emperor held an audience with all officials at Weiyang Palace.

卓朝服升车，既而马惊憧泥，还入更衣。其少妻止之，卓不从，遂行。
董卓穿朝服登车，不久马受惊跌入泥中，回家换衣服。他的小老婆劝阻，他不听，仍然出发。
Dong Zhuo put on his court garments and rode a carriage. Shortly after, his horse became skittish and threw him into the mud. He returned home to change clothes. His concubine tried to stop him, but he ignored her and set out again.

乃陈兵夹道，自垒及宫，左步右骑，屯卫周匝，令吕布等扞卫前后。
董卓在路两边布列士兵，从营垒到宫廷，左为步兵，右为骑兵，周围驻卫，命吕布等在前后保卫。
He arranged troops along both sides of the road, from his camp to the palace, with infantry on the left and cavalry on the right, encircling him, and ordered Lv Bu and others to guard the front and rear.

王允乃与士孙瑞密表其事，使瑞自书诏以授布，令骑都尉李肃与布同心勇士十余人，伪着卫士服于北掖门内以待卓。
王允秘密告知士孙瑞此事，由瑞亲自写诏书交给吕布，命骑都尉李肃与吕布及十余勇士穿卫士服在北掖门内埋伏。
Wang Yun secretly informed Shisun Rui, who wrote an edict personally addressed to Lv Bu, ordering him and ten other brave men, along with Cavalry Commander Li Su, to disguise themselves as palace guards and lie in wait inside Beiye Gate.

卓将至，马惊不行，怪惧欲还。吕布劝令进，遂入门。
董卓快到门口时，马又受惊不走，他感到奇怪害怕，想要回去。吕布劝他进入，于是董卓进了门。
As Dong Zhuo approached, his horse was again frightened and refused to move. Alarmed, he wanted to turn back, but Lv Bu urged him to enter, and he did.

肃以戟刺之，卓衷甲不入，伤臂堕车。顾大呼曰：“吕布何在?”
李肃用戟刺董卓，铠甲挡住刺击，他手臂受伤，从车上摔下，回头大喊：“吕布在哪里？”
Li Su struck at Dong Zhuo with a halberd, but it could not penetrate his armor. Dong Zhuo’s arm was injured, and he fell from the carriage. Turning around, he shouted, “Where is Lv Bu?”

布曰：“有诏讨贼臣。”卓大骂曰：“庸狗敢如是邪!”布应声持矛刺卓，趣兵斩之。
吕布回答：“有诏讨贼臣。”董卓大骂：“庸狗敢如此！”吕布随即持矛刺击董卓，指挥士兵将其斩杀。
Lv Bu replied, “An edict has been issued to punish the traitor minister.” Dong Zhuo shouted, “You worthless dog dare to do this!” Lv Bu immediately speared Dong Zhuo and ordered the soldiers to kill him.

主簿田仪及卓仓头前赴其尸，布又杀之。
主簿田仪和董卓的家奴冲向董卓尸体，吕布将他们也杀死。
Recorder Tian Yi and Dong Zhuo’s attendants rushed to his body, and Lv Bu killed them as well.

驰赍赦书，以令官陛，内外士卒，皆称万岁。百姓歌舞于道，长安中士女卖其珠衣以购酒肉相庆。
吕布骑马携赦书，命令宫廷内外，士卒皆呼“万岁”，百姓在街上歌舞庆祝，男女纷纷卖珠宝衣服买酒肉庆贺。
Lv Bu rode swiftly with the edict of amnesty, proclaiming it throughout the palace and army. Soldiers and officials proclaimed “Long live the emperor!” The public danced and sang in the streets. Men and women sold their jewelry and clothes to buy wine and meat for celebration.


玉衣装市酒肉相庆者，填满街肆。
女，街上店里都是。
The streets and shops were filled with women, selling their jewelry and clothing to buy wine and meat for the celebrations.

使皇甫嵩攻卓弟旻于郿坞，杀其母妻男女，尽灭其族。
朝廷派皇甫嵩进攻董卓的弟弟董旻于郿坞，杀了他的母亲、妻子及子女，灭了他的全族。
The emperor ordered Huangfu Song to attack Dong Zhuo’s younger brother Dong Min at Mei Fortress, killing his mother, wife, and children, wiping out the entire clan.

乃尸卓于市，天时始热，卓素充肥，脂流于地。守尸吏然火置卓脐中，光明达曙，如是积日。
董卓的尸体暴露在市上，当时天气开始炎热，董卓一向肥胖，脂肪流在地上。守尸体的官吏点火放在董卓的肚脐中，燃烧至天亮，如此持续了好几天。
Dong Zhuo’s corpse was displayed in the market. The weather had become hot, and since Dong Zhuo was corpulent, his body fat flowed onto the ground. The officers guarding the corpse lit a fire in his navel, which burned until dawn, continuing in this manner for several days.

诸袁门生又聚董氏之尸，焚灰扬之于路。
袁氏的各位门生又把破碎的董家人的尸体聚拢起来，焚烧成灰在路上抛洒。
The followers of the Yuan family gathered the corpses of the Dong clan, burned them to ashes, and scattered them along the streets.

坞中珍藏有金二三万斤，银八九万斤，锦绮、绩縠、纨素、奇玩积如丘山。
坞中的珍藏有二三万斤金，八九万斤银，锦绮、绩縠、纨素、奇玩等器物堆积成山。
The treasures within Dong’s fortress included twenty to thirty thousand jin of gold, eighty to ninety thousand jin of silver, bolts of brocade and patterned silk, five-colored silk, white silk, and exotic objects, all piled up like mountains.
