《易》曰：“天垂象，圣人则之。”
《周易》说：“天上有征象，圣人就效法它。”
In the Book of Changes, it was said, "When Heaven presents a phenomenon, sages follow it."

宦者四星，在皇位之侧，故《周礼》置官，亦备其数。
天上有四颗宦者星，在帝座的旁边，所以《周礼》设置官员，也把宦官列入。
There were four stars of eunuchs in the sky, which surrounded the imperial throne star. Thus, in the Book of Rites, it was recorded that official positions were established, which also included eunuchs.

阍者守中门之禁，寺人掌女宫之戒。
阍者守卫宫门的进出，寺人掌管宫女的戒备。
The gatekeepers guarded the entrances of the palace, while the chamberlains managed the women’s quarters.

又云：“王之正内五人。”
又说：“帝王的卧室配备五个宦者。”
It was also stated: “Five eunuchs attend to the sovereign’s inner chamber.”

《月令》:“仲冬命阉尹审门闾、谨房室。”
《月令》说：“仲冬的时候命令主领宦官的官，谨戒门闾、房室的出入开闭。”
The Monthly Ordinances said: “In mid-winter, the chief eunuch is commanded to inspect doors and gates and carefully watch over the chambers.”

《诗》之《小雅》，亦有《巷伯》刺谗之篇。
《诗经》的《小雅》，也有《巷伯》刺谏周幽王过失的诗篇。
In the “Lesser Odes” of the Book of Songs, there is also the poem “Xiangbo,” which criticizes slanderers.

然宦人之在王朝者，其来旧矣。
这样看来宦官之在帝王朝廷，历史很悠久了。
From this, it is clear that eunuchs have long existed in royal courts.

将以其体非全气，情志专良，通关中人，易以役养乎？
大概是因为他们身体有缺陷，情志专一，可以和宫里的人交往，便于使唤吧？
Perhaps because their bodies are incomplete, their hearts and intentions are more focused and loyal, allowing them to interact freely within the palace and making them easy to employ.

然而后世因之，才任稍广。
因此后世沿袭，对他们论才而任职的道路逐渐开阔。
As later generations continued this practice, the scope of their official duties gradually expanded.

其能者则勃貂、管苏有功于楚、晋，景监、缪贤著庸于秦、赵。
他们中有才能的，勃貂、管苏各自对于楚、晋有功劳，景监、缪贤对于秦、赵有功劳。
Among the capable ones, Bo Diao and Guan Su rendered meritorious service to Chu and Jin, while Jing Jian and Miao Xian distinguished themselves in Qin and Zhao.


赵及其敝也，则竖刁乱齐，伊戾祸宋。
等到这个制度产生末流之弊，那么就有竖刁使齐国酿成变乱，伊戾给宋国带来灾祸。
It was not until later, once this system had entered a decadent stage, that Shu Diao caused Qi State to fall into disorder, and Yi Li brought disaster to Song State.

汉兴，仍袭秦制，置中常侍官。
汉朝建立，依旧因袭秦朝制度，设置中常侍官。
When the Han Dynasty was founded, it inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty for appointing eunuchs to the posts of Palace Attendants-in-ordinary.

然亦引用士人以参其选。
但也用士人，以错杂运用这个岗位。
Scholars were also appointed to such positions as a way to alternate those who served in the position.

皆银珰左貂，给事殿省。
都穿戴银珰左貂的冠服，在宫殿供职。
They all wore silver earrings and an imperial garment made of fur with an upper left front. They served in the palace.

及高后称制，乃以张卿为大谒者，出入卧内，受宣诏命。
等到高后掌权，才用张卿担任大谒者，进出卧房，受高后的旨意发布诏命。
It was not until Empress Gao took power, appointing Zhang Qing as Supervisor of Receptionists, that he could go in and out of the bedroom to receive Empress Gao's orders and pronouncements.

文帝时有赵谈、北宫伯子，颇见亲幸。
文帝的时候，有赵谈、北宫伯子，很受皇帝亲近宠幸。
In the reign of Emperor Wen, there were two, Zhao Tan and Beigong Bozi, who were greatly favored by the emperor.

至于孝武，亦爱李延年。
到了孝武帝时代，也宠爱李延年。
In his era, Emperor Xiaowu was very fond of Li Yannian.

帝数宴后庭，或潜游离馆。
武帝经常在后庭宴饮，有时私下里去游览离宫。
Emperor Wu often held banquets at the rear imperial garden, and he sometimes went outside the palace privately, to go sightseeing at his temporary abode.

故请奏机事，多以宦人主之。
所以请示或者上报国家大事，多由宦官负责。
While he was gone, if requests or reports regarding national affairs arose, the eunuchs were put in charge.

至元帝之世，史游为黄门令，勤心纳忠，有所补益。
到了元帝的时代，史游担任黄门令，尽心尽职进纳忠言，对国家有益。
Shi You served as Director of Eunuch Attendants up to the reign of Emperor Yuan. Wholeheartedly, he tried to adopt good suggestions and to report criticisms to the emperor, which were definitely beneficial to the country.

其后弘恭、石显以佞险自进，卒有萧、周之祸，损秽帝德焉。
后来弘恭、石显凭借谄媚阴险进用，最后酿成萧望之、周堪被他们迫害的灾祸，使皇帝的德政有所损害。
Later, Hong Gong and Shi Xian relied on crafty flattery to get themselves appointed and promoted. In the end, they caused Xiao Wangzhi and Zhou Kan to be persecuted. They greatly damaged the Emperor's ability to govern virtuously.

中兴之初，宦官悉用阉人，不复杂调它士。
东汉初年，宦官都用阉人，不再用士人。
In the beginning of the Later Han Dynasty, eunuchs were people who had been castrated, and scholars were no longer employed.

至永平中，始置员数，中常侍四人，小黄门十人。
到永平年间（公元58—75年），开始设置岗位名额，中常侍四人，小黄门十人。
During the Yongping era (58–75), the status of eunuchs, and the number of their positions had just been set up—four Palace Attendants-in-ordinary and ten Junior Attendant Eunuchs.

和帝即祚幼弱，而窦宪兄弟专总权威。
和帝登基时年纪幼小，而窦宪兄弟掌握朝政。
When Emperor He ascended the throne, he was still a child, so imperial power was controlled by Dou Xian and his brothers.


内外臣僚，莫由亲接，所与居者，唯阉宦而已。
接见他们，跟他居住在一起的，只有宦官而已。
The emperor was unable to have an audience with officials either inside or outside the capital. Only eunuchs lived with the child emperor.

故郑众得专谋禁中，终除大憨。
所以郑众得以在宫中主持谋略，最终除掉大恶人窦宪。
That was why Zheng Zhong was able to plot to overthrow Dou Xian, who was considered an extreme villain.

遂享分土之封，超登宫卿之位，于是中官始盛焉。
于是享有分土的封爵，坐上大长秋的位置。由此宦官势力开始兴盛。
Thus, Zheng Zhong had an honorable title bestowed upon him, with a fiefdom included. He was also appointed Director of Palace Domestic Service. Since then, the power and influence of the eunuchs had expanded.

自明帝以后，迄乎延平，委用渐大，而其员稍增。
从明帝以后，到殇帝延平年间，委任宦官逐渐扩大，而宦官名额逐渐增多。
From the reign of Emperor Ming to the Yanping era of Emperor Shang, the positions given to eunuchs were gradually expanded and the number of eunuchs enlarged.

中常侍至有十人，小黄门二十人。
中常侍达到十人，小黄门二十人。
Ten eunuchs were appointed to the posts of Palace Attendants-in-ordinary and there were twenty eunuchs appointed as Junior Attendants.

改以金珰右貂，兼领卿署之职。
冠服改用金珰右貂，兼任卿署的职务。
Their court dress was altered to include golden earrings and fur garments with upper right fronts. They also acted as ministers.

邓后以女主临政，而万机殷远，朝臣国议，无由参断帷幄。
邓太后以女主的身份掌管朝政，而国家大事繁多，朝臣对于国家事务的商议，不能到太后的帷幄中决断。
In the capacity of head of the imperial household, Empress Dowager Deng held the reins of imperial power. National affairs were so numerous and complicated, but court officials could not go to Empress Dowager's chambers to discuss them, or to make final decisions regarding such matters.

称制下令，不出房闱之间，不得不委用刑人，寄之国命。
发布诏书，不出房闱，不得不委用宦官，把国家大命交给他们。
Thus, when issuing edicts from her chambers, Empress Dowager relied on eunuchs to provide her with important information and to deliver her decisions.

手握王爵，口含天宪，非复掖廷、永巷之职，闺牖房闼之任也。
手里握着帝王的封爵，口宣圣旨，已经不再是负责宫里掖廷、永巷以及闺房门户的小事了。
While eunuchs held honorable titles in their hands and imperial edicts in their mouths, their responsibilities were no longer trivial—for example, being in charge of palace services for the empress and the imperial concubines, acting as guards of the long alley, the palace doors, or the gates.

其后孙程定立顺之功，曹腾参建桓之策。
后来孙程立下了拥立顺帝的功劳，曹腾参与拥立桓帝的策划。
Later, Sun Cheng made a contribution by supporting Emperor Shun’s ascendency, while Cao Teng participated in the plot to defend Emperor Huan’s sovereignty.

续以五侯合谋，梁冀受钺，迹因公正，恩固主心。
接下来五侯合谋，杀了梁冀，凭着公正的名义做这件事，皇帝因此感激他们。
The power of the eunuchs was preserved during the conspiracy of the Five Marquises who planned together to kill Liang Ji. Because the Five Marquises claimed that killing Liang Ji was an act of justice, the emperor was grateful for the eunuchs’ support.

故中外服从，上下咸安。
从此宦官的地位与权势被确认，内外官员皆服从。
Ever since, the status and power of eunuchs was confirmed, and officials both inside and outside the palace obeyed them.


上下屏气。
上下不敢非议。
Officials inside and outside the court declined to criticize them, supporting  their  contributions.

或称伊、霍之勋，无谢于往载。
有人称赞他们的功劳与伊尹、霍光相比毫不逊色。
Some said their merits were no less than those of Yi Yin and Huo Guang.

或谓良、平之画，复兴于当今。
也有人说张良、陈平的谋划又在当今重现。
Others said the stratagems of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping had reappeared in the present day.

虽时有忠公，而竟见排斥。
虽然时有忠直之臣，但最终都被排斥。
Even though there were loyal and upright officials from time to time, they were ultimately rejected.

举动回山海，呼吸变霜露。
他们的举动能回转山海，呼吸能改变气候。
Their actions could move mountains and seas, and their breath could change frost and dew.

阿旨曲求，则光宠三族。
阿附他们的，便能光宗耀祖。
Those who flattered their will were rewarded with glory for three generations.

直情忤意，则参夷五宗。
直言逆耳者，则株连五族。
Those who spoke frankly and offended them saw five generations exterminated.

汉之纲纪大乱矣。
汉朝的法纪与纲常因此大乱。
The laws and order of the Han dynasty were thrown into chaos.

若夫高冠长剑，纡朱怀金者，布满宫闱。
那些戴高冠、佩长剑、着朱带、怀金印的宦官布满宫廷。
Eunuchs wearing tall caps, carrying long swords, and holding gold seals filled the palace halls.

苴茅分虎，南面臣人者，盖以十数。
被封侯、分封领地、坐南面称臣的，多达十余人。
Those who were ennobled, given fiefs, and ruled people facing south numbered more than ten.

府署第馆，棋列于都鄙。
他们的府署宅邸，如棋布星罗于京城内外。
Their mansions and offices were spread throughout the capital, both inside and outside the city.

子弟支附，过半于州国。
他们的子弟宗族和依附者，占据州国官位过半。
Their sons, relatives, and followers occupied more than half the offices across the provinces.

南金、和宝、冰纨、雾縠之积，盈仞珍臧。
南方黄金、和氏宝玉、细纨雾縠等珍物堆满仓库。
Their stores overflowed with southern gold, Heshi jade, fine silk, and gauze.

嫱媛侍儿、歌童、舞女之玩，充备绮室。
嫔妃侍女、歌童舞女充满华丽的房室。
Their splendid rooms were filled with concubines, maids, singing boys, and dancing girls.

狗马饰雕文，土木被缇绣。
狗马佩饰雕花，屋宇覆以绣饰。
Their dogs and horses wore decorated harnesses, and their houses were adorned with embroidery.

皆剥割萌黎，竞恣奢欲。
他们都剥削百姓，恣意奢侈。
They all plundered the common people and indulged in extravagance.

构害明贤，专树党类。
他们构陷贤人，专树朋党。
They framed the virtuous and established their own factions.

其有更相援引，希附权强者，皆腐身、熏子。
那些互相援引，攀附权贵的人，都身败名裂，祸及子孙。
Those who supported each other and sought to cling to power all corrupted themselves and tainted their offspring.

皆腐身、熏子，以自炫达。
到权势的，都自阉或者阉割儿子，以求显贵。
or their sons in order to gain prestige and prominence.

同敝相济，故其徒有繁，败国蠹政之事，不可单书。
恶人与恶人抱团，所以这些人就多起来，败坏国家的行为，写不胜写。
The devils helped one another and their population grew larger and larger. It was difficult to record all the damage they did to the country incident by incident.

所以海内嗟毒，志士穷栖，寇剧缘间，摇乱区夏。
所以海内百姓叹息痛恨，有志之士隐居，寇盗巨贼乘隙而起，使国家动乱。
Thus, while all the people in the entire world hated the eunuchs and complained about the things they did, those who had ambition and talent desired to become recluses. Bandits, robbers, and fierce thieves took advantage of this loophole and caused tremendous trouble and disorder in the country.

虽忠良怀愤，时或奋发，而言出祸从，旋见孥戮。
虽然也有忠良之臣心怀愤怒，经常奋身而起，但话一出口灾祸就马上降临，很快就被杀害。
Although there were some loyal and kind officials who felt angry and dashed ahead against the eunuchs, no sooner did the words come from their mouths, disaster would befall them and they would be killed.

因复大考钩党，转相诬染，凡称善士，莫不离被灾毒。
于是又广泛掀起党锢之狱，辗转牵连。凡是称为好人的，无不遭受灾祸毒害。
Consequently, the imprisonment of political factions was widespread, and the trouble usually involved many people in many ways. Those who called themselves righteous suffered from the effects of disaster and malicious treatment.

窦武、何进位崇戚近，乘九服之嚣怨，协群英之势力，而以疑留不断，至于殄败，斯亦运之极乎!
窦武、何进，一个官位崇高，一个属于外戚，乘全国人民对他们的怨恨，联合各位直臣的势力，却因为犹豫不决，最终失败。这也是国运到了尽头吗?
Dou Wu and He Jin—one holding a high-ranking position, the other being the empress's relative—took advantage of the fact that the entire nation hated the eunuchs. They gathered the power of all upright officials to proceed against the eunuchs. However, because of their indecisiveness and hesitancy, they failed in the end. Wasn't that the destiny of the dynasty?

虽袁绍龚行，芟夷无余，然以暴易乱，亦何云及!
虽然后来袁绍替天行道，把他们杀尽，但是用这个残酷的手段去改变宦官的乱政，怎么说好呢?
Although Yuan Shao finally killed the eunuchs, acting to correct wrongdoings in accordance with Heaven's decree, was it truly a good method to use such cruelty to stop the eunuchs’ abusive insurgency?

自曹腾说梁冀竟立昏弱，魏武因之，遂迁龟鼎。
自从曹腾劝说梁冀，最终拥立了昏弱的桓帝。曹操沿袭这种做法，于是改朝换代。
Cao Teng persuaded Liang Ji, and in the end, they supported a weak and incompetent Emperor Huan to ascend the throne. Cao Cao succeeded at this method, thus changing the regime.

所谓“君以此始，必以此终”，信乎其然矣!
所谓的“你以这种方式开始，必然会以这种方式结束”，确实是这样啊!
As the saying goes, "If you start in a certain way, then you will finish in that same way." This is so true.


