李膺字元礼，颍川襄城人也。
李膺字元礼，颍川郡襄城县人。
Li Ying, style named Yuanli, was a native of Xiangcheng District in Yingchuan Commandery.

祖父修，安帝时为太尉。
祖父李修，汉安帝时担任太尉。
His grandfather Li Xiu served as Defender-in-chief during the era of Emperor An of the Han Dynasty.

父益，赵国相。
父亲李益，官至赵国相。
His father Li Yi ever served as Counselor-delegate of Zhao State.

膺性简亢，无所交接，唯以同郡荀淑、陈是为师友。
李膺性情简略不与俗人为伍，不与权贵交往，只与同郡荀淑、陈是成为师友关系。
Li Ying's nature was simple and frugal, and he disliked associating with the powerful and wealthy. He befriended only his town fellows, Xun Shu and Chen Jian. Their relationship combined friendship and learning.

初举孝廉，为司徒胡广所辟，举高第，再迁青州刺史。
开始时被保举为孝廉，受司徒胡广征召，以高第推荐他，又升任青州刺史。
In his early years, Li Ying was recommended as a Filial and Incorrupt candidate. He was later summoned by Minister of Education Hu Guang and recommended as a Customs Collector. He was then promoted to the post of Regional Inspector of Qingzhou.

守令畏威明，多望风弃官。
郡守县令惧怕他的严厉清明，听到他来担任刺史多弃官而去。
The governors of the commanderies and the district magistrates of Qingzhou feared his integrity and strictness. Upon hearing that Li Ying would become Regional Inspector, most of them resigned their positions.

复征，再迁渔阳太守。
再次被征召，又升渔阳太守。
He was once again summoned to the capital and this time promoted to the Governorship of Yuyang.

寻转蜀郡太守，以母老乞不之官。
不久调蜀郡太守，因为母亲年纪大了，请求不上任。
Not long afterwards, he was transferred to the Governorship of Shu Commandery. Because his mother was old, he requested that he would not be assigned there.

转护乌桓校尉。
调任护乌桓校尉。
Later, he was transferred to the post of Commandant of Resisting Wuhuan.

鲜卑数犯塞，膺常蒙矢石，每破走之，虏甚惮慑。
鲜卑屡次侵犯边塞，李膺常冒着箭和石头，每每把他们打退，鲜卑很怕他。
Tartar tribes had repeatedly invaded the frontier. Often risking his life under heavy fire, Li Ying always defeated the invaders. Thus, the Tartar tribes were frightened of him.

以公事免官，还居纶氏，教授常千人。
因为公事被免官，回来住在纶氏县，教授学生常有上千人。
Due to some public affairs, he was removed from his post. He went back to live and teach at Lunshi District, where he often had more than one thousand students under him.

南阳樊陵求为门徒，膺谢不受陵后以阿附宦官，致位太尉，为节者所羞。。
南阳人樊陵请求做他的学生，李膺拒绝了他。樊陵后来因为阿附宦官，做到太尉，被有节操的人鄙视。
Fan Ling, a Nanyang native, asked to be Li Ying's student, but was rejected. Fan Ling later toadied up to the eunuchs, chiming in with them, and was therefore appointed Defender-in-chief. He was despised by those virtuous people.

荀爽尝就谒膺，因为其御，既还，喜曰：“今日乃得御李君矣。”其见慕如此
荀爽曾经拜见李膺，于是帮他驾车，回家后，开心地说：“今天终于为李先生驾了一回车。”他就是这样被人仰慕的。
Xun Shuang once paid a visit to Li Ying, driving the carriage for him. After Xun Shuang returned home, he exclaimed with delight, "Today, I finally got a chance to drive for Mr. Li!" This shows how much Li Ying was respected.

永寿二年，鲜卑寇云中，桓帝闻膺能，乃复征为度辽将军
永寿二年(公元156年),鲜卑侵犯云中郡，桓帝听说李膺有才能，于是再征他担任度辽将军。
In the second year of the Yongshou era (156), Tartar tribes invaded Yunzhong Commandery. Hearing of Li Ying's talent and capability, Emperor Huan summoned him to the post of General of Crossing Liao.

先是羌虏及疏勒、龟兹数出攻钞张掖、酒泉、云中诸郡，百姓屡被其害
此前，羌人以及疏勒、龟兹经常出来侵略张掖、酒泉、云中各郡，百姓屡次受害。
Before this, the Qiang, the Kashgar, and the Kucha often came to attack Zhangye, Jiuquan, and Yunzhong Commanderies. The residents there were repeatedly damaged and plundered.

自膺到边，皆望风惧服，先所掠男女，悉送还塞下
自从李膺到了边疆，侵略者都惧怕畏服，以前所抢来的男女，全部送到塞下。
Once Li Ying arrived at the frontier, the invaders became frightened and therefore surrendered. They returned all the captured men and women by escorting them back to the frontier territory of the Han.

自是之后，声振远域
从此以后，李膺的名声远播少数民族地区。
From then on, Li Ying's reputation spread even to the remote ethnic minority areas.

延熹二年，征，再迁河南尹
延熹二年(公元159年)朝廷征召，又升河南尹。
In the second year of the Yanxi era (159), Li Ying was summoned back to court and promoted to the post of Governor of Henan.

时宛陵大姓羊元群罢北海郡，臧罪狼藉，郡舍溷轩有奇巧，乃载之以归
当时宛陵豪族羊元群被罢免北海郡太守职务，贪污很严重，太守官署厕所中的奇巧之物也都被他偷运回家。
At that time, the powerful clan of Wanling, Yang Yuanqun, had been removed from the Governorship of Beihai Commandery. Corruption was very serious there. In the rest room at the Governor's office, many marvelous and exquisite objects were displayed. But Yang Yuanqun stole away these things and transported them to his own house stealthily.

膺表欲按其罪，元群行赂宦竖，膺反坐输作左校
李膺上表想治他的罪，羊元群贿赂宦官，李膺反而因此被罚到左校服劳役
Li Ying wrote a report, hoping to punish him, but Yang Yuanqun bribed the eunuchs. Therefore it was Li Ying who was sentenced to labor at the Left Construction Office.


初，膺与廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐等共同心志，纠罚奸幸，绲、祐时亦得罪输作。
早先时候，李膺与廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐等人同心协力，揭发惩罚奸人，冯绲、刘祐这时也因为得罪被判刑服劳役。
Earlier, Li Ying, Feng Gun, Chamberlain for Law, Liu You, Chamberlain for the National Treasury, and others had shared a desire to expose evil people. Feng Gun and Liu You were sentenced to hard labor at the same time as Li Ying.

司隶校尉应奉上疏……乞原膺等，以备不虞。
司隶校尉应奉上疏……请求宽恕李膺等人，以防止突发事件。
Metropolitan Commandant Ying Feng submitted a petition letter to forgive Li Ying and others. He said that pardoning Li Ying and the others would prevent an unforeseen calamity.

书奏，乃悉免其刑。
奏书上报，于是全部免除了他们的刑罚。
The letter was reported to the emperor, who accordingly exempted all of them from punishment.

再迁，复拜司隶校尉。
升职两次，又担任司隶校尉。
Li Ying was promoted twice, and once again he was appointed to the post of Metropolitan Commandant.

时张让弟朔为野王令，贪残无道，至乃杀孕妇。
当时，张让的弟弟张朔担任野王令，贪污残酷所为不道，甚至杀害孕妇。
At that time, Zhang Shuo, Zhang Rang's younger brother, served as District Magistrate of Yewang. Corrupt and cruel, he continually committed immoral acts, even killing pregnant women.

闻膺厉威严，惧罪逃还京师，因匿兄让弟舍，藏于合柱中。
听说李膺作风严厉，畏罪逃回京师，就藏在他哥哥张让家里的复壁中。
Hearing of Li Ying's style of strict management and afraid of being punished, he ran away, returning to the capital where he sought shelter with his elder brother Zhang Rang and hid himself in an enclosed wall of the house.

膺知其状，率将吏卒破柱取朔，付洛阳狱。
李膺知道了这个情况，带领将士打破复壁抓了张朔，交付洛阳监狱。
When Li Ying found it out, he brought his subordinates and staff to break the wall and arrest Zhang Shuo. He turned Zhang Shuo over to the prison official in Luoyang.

受辞毕，即杀之。
招供完，即刻把他杀了。
Zhang Shuo was killed after confession.


让诉冤于帝，诏膺入殿，御亲临轩，诘以不先请便加诛辟之意。
张让向皇帝诉冤，诏令李膺进殿，皇帝亲自到轩庭，责问李膺为什么不先请示就杀人。
Zhang Rang aired his grievances to the emperor. Li Ying was called into the palace. The emperor came to the palace yard personally to reproach Li Ying, asking why he had not reported the case before executing Zhang Shuo.

膺对曰：“昔晋文公执卫成公归于京师，《春秋》是焉。
李膺回答：“以前晋文公在天子身边直接抓了卫成公，《春秋》认为这样做是对的。
Li Ying replied, "In ancient times, Duke Wen of Jin arrested Duke Cheng of Wei in the presence of the Emperor of Zhou. The *Spring and Autumn Annals* states that it was right to do so.

《礼》云：公族有罪，虽曰宥之，有司执宪不从。
《礼记》说公族犯了罪，即使有命令说宽恕他们，有关部门也可以按照法律不听从命令。
In the *Book of Rites*, it is written that when a duke commits a crime, even if the emperor orders forgiveness, the judicial officials should still enforce the law.

昔仲尼为鲁司寇，七日而诛少正卯。
以前孔子担任鲁国的司寇，上任七天就杀了少正卯。
When Confucius was appointed Minister of Justice in the State of Lu, he executed Shaozheng Mao after only seven days in office.

今臣到官已积一旬，私惧以稽留为愆，不意获速疾之罪。
现在我上任已经一个月了，心里还担心犯下做事迟延缓慢的错误，想不到因为做事快而获罪。
Now I have already been in office for more than ten days, and I was afraid of being blamed for delays, never expecting to be condemned for acting too swiftly.

诚自知衅责，死不旋踵，特乞留五日，克殄元恶，退就鼎镬，始生之愿也。
我知道自己犯了罪，死期将至，我专门请求您再让我留任五天，杀光所有大恶之人，然后回来服死刑，这是我生平的理想。
I know that I am guilty and that death is near, but I beg to be allowed to remain in office for five more days to eradicate the chief villains, then I will return to face execution — this is the wish of my life.

帝无复言，顾谓让曰：“此汝弟之罪，司隶何愆？”乃遣出之。
皇帝不再说他，回头对张让说：“这是你弟弟自己犯的罪，司隶有什么错？”于是让他出去。
The emperor said nothing further. Turning to Zhang Rang, he said, "This is your brother’s own crime — how is the Metropolitan Commandant at fault?" Then he ordered Zhang Rang to leave.


自此诸黄门常侍皆鞠躬屏气，休沐不敢复出宫省。
从此各个黄门常侍都小心谨慎，休假日也不敢再走出皇宫。
From then on, the eunuchs were all cautious and alert, and even on their days off, they did not dare to step outside the palace.

帝怪问其故，
皇帝觉得奇怪，就问他们原因。
The emperor felt puzzled and asked them for the reason.

并叩头泣曰：“畏李校尉。”
他们都叩头哭着说：“怕李校尉。”
They all kowtowed and wept, saying, “We are afraid of Commandant Li.”

是时朝庭日乱，纲纪颓弛，
这时朝廷一天比一天混乱，朝纲法纪败坏。
At that time, the imperial court grew more chaotic by the day, and discipline and order had collapsed.

膺独持风裁，以声名自高。
李膺坚持节操，以高风亮节为表率。
Li Ying alone upheld integrity and virtue, earning great repute for his moral conduct.

士有被其容接者，名为登龙门。
士人有被他容纳接见的，称为“登龙门”。
Those scholars who were received and accepted by him were said to have “mounted the Dragon Gate.”

及遭党事，当考实膺等，
等到遭遇党锢案，要考问李膺等人。
When the Party Proscription incident arose, Li Ying and others were to be interrogated.

案经三府，太尉陈蕃却之，曰：
案子发到三府，太尉陈蕃拒绝，说：
The case was sent to the Three Dukes’ offices, but Grand Commandant Chen Fan refused, saying:

“今所考案，皆海内人誉，忧国忠公之臣。
“现在所拷问的，都是得海内民心的人，是忧心国事、忠诚公正的官员。
‘Those we are to interrogate are men praised by all under heaven, loyal and upright officials devoted to the state.

此等犹将十世宥也，岂有罪名不章而致收掠者乎？”
像这样的人应该宽恕他们十代子孙，哪里有罪证不明而抓起来拷问的道理？”
Such men should be forgiven for ten generations — how can we arrest and torture them without clear evidence of guilt?’

不肯平署。
他不肯签署。
He refused to endorse the order.

帝愈怒，遂下膺等于黄门北寺狱。
皇帝更加愤怒，于是把李膺等人关进黄门北寺狱。
The emperor grew even more enraged and imprisoned Li Ying and his associates in the Northern Prison of the Eunuchs.

膺等颇引宦官子弟，宦官多惧，
李膺等人的供词牵涉宦官子弟，宦官都很害怕。
Li Ying and his followers’ statements implicated the eunuchs’ relatives, and the eunuchs became fearful.

请帝以天时宜赦，
他们请求皇帝按照天时规律赦免他们。
They begged the emperor to grant an amnesty according to the auspicious timing of Heaven.

于是大赦天下。
于是大赦天下。
Therefore, an amnesty was proclaimed throughout the empire.

膺免归乡里，居阳城山中。
李膺免官回乡，住在阳城山中。
Li Ying was dismissed from office and returned to his hometown, living in the mountains of Yangcheng.

天下士大夫皆高尚其道，而污秽朝廷。
天下士大夫都认为他道德高尚，而朝廷污浊不堪。
All the scholars and gentlemen of the empire praised his noble virtue and denounced the imperial court as corrupt and filthy.


及陈蕃免太尉，朝野属意于膺。
等到陈蕃被罢免了太尉，朝野上下都希望李膺接替。
When Chen Fan was removed from the post of Defender-in-chief, both the court and the people hoped that Li Ying would succeed him.

荀爽恐其名高致祸，欲令屈节以全乱世。
荀爽怕他因为名望太高导致灾祸，想让他隐居不出以在乱世中保全生命。
Xun Shuang feared that his great reputation might bring him misfortune and wanted him to humble himself and live in seclusion to survive the troubled times.

顷之，帝崩。
不久，皇帝去世。
Not long afterwards, the emperor passed away.

陈蕃为太傅，与大将军窦武共秉朝政。
陈蕃担任太傅，与大将军窦武共同掌管朝政。
Chen Fan became Grand Mentor and, together with General-in-chief Dou Wu, took control of the government.

连谋诛诸宦官，故引用天下名士。
他们联合谋划诛杀宦官，因此招用天下的名士。
They conspired to eliminate the eunuchs and thus recruited renowned scholars from across the empire.

乃以膺为长乐少府。
于是让李膺担任长乐少府。
Accordingly, they appointed Li Ying as the Steward of the Empress Dowager’s Palace.

及陈、窦之败，膺等复废。
等到陈蕃、窦武失败，李膺等人又被罢黜。
When Chen Fan and Dou Wu were defeated, Li Ying and the others were again dismissed from office.


后张俭事起，收捕钩党，乡人谓膺曰：“可去矣。”
后来张俭的案子发生了，朝廷抓捕所谓的钩党人员，乡里人对李膺说：“可以逃了。”
Later, when Zhang Jian’s case broke out and the court began arresting members of the so-called clique, one of the villagers said to Li Ying, “You should flee.”

对曰：“事不辞难，罪不逃刑，臣之节也。”
他回答说：“做事不推辞艰难，有罪不逃避刑罚，这是做臣子的节操。”
He replied, “A true minister does not shirk from hardship nor evade punishment for his crimes — this is the integrity of a loyal subject.”

“吾年已六十，死生有命，去将安之?”
“我年纪已经六十岁了，生死有命，逃到哪里去?”
“I am already sixty years old; life and death are decreed by fate — where could I possibly go?”

乃诣诏狱，考死。
于是到诏狱自首，被拷打致死。
Then he went to the imperial prison to surrender himself and was tortured to death.

妻子徙边，门生故吏及其父兄，并被禁锢。
妻子儿女被流放到边境，学生、老部下以及他的父兄都被禁锢。
His wife and children were exiled to the frontier, and his students, former subordinates, and close relatives were all barred from office.

时侍御史蜀郡景毅子顾为膺门徒，而未有录牒，故不及于谴。
当时侍御史蜀郡人景毅的儿子景顾是李膺的学生，但未被朝廷列入名单，所以没有遭到处罚。
At that time, Jing Gu, son of Attendant Censor Jing Yi from Shu Commandery, was one of Li Ying’s disciples, but since his name had not yet been officially recorded, he escaped punishment.

毅乃慨然曰：“本谓膺贤，遣子师之，岂可以漏夺名籍，苟安而已!”
景毅于是感慨道：“我本因李膺是贤人，所以叫儿子拜他为师，怎么可以因为名单上漏掉了就苟且偷安呢?”
Jing Yi then sighed and said, “I regarded Li Ying as a virtuous man and sent my son to study under him; how could we cling to safety merely because his name was omitted from the list?”

遂自表免归，时人义之。
于是他主动上表辞职，当时人都认为他很有道义。
He therefore submitted a memorial to resign and return home, and the people of his time praised him for his righteousness.
