鲁字公旗。
张鲁字公旗。
Zhang Lu's style name was Gongqi.

初，祖父陵顺帝时客于蜀，学道鹤鸣山中，造作符书，以惑百姓。
早先时候，他的祖父张陵在汉顺帝时寓居在蜀地，在鹤鸣山中学道，自己造出符书，用来迷惑百姓。
Earlier during the reign of Emperor Shun of Han, his grandfather Zhang Ling stayed in Shu, and studied Daoist religion in Heming Mountain. Zhang Ling forged Daoist magic texts to mislead the populace.

受其道者辄出米五斗，故谓之“米贼”。
加入他的教派的人就交纳五斗米，所以被称为“米贼”。
Anyone was required to pay five deciliters of rice before admission into his school, so he was called “the Rice Thief.”

陵传子衡，衡传于鲁，鲁遂自号师君。
张陵传给儿子张衡，张衡传给张鲁，张鲁于是自称“师君”。
Zhang Ling passed the knowledge to his son Zhang Heng, and then Zhang Heng to his son Zhang Lu. Zhang Lu thus called himself “the Master.”

其来学者，初名为鬼卒，后号祭酒。
那些来跟他学道的，初来的称为“鬼卒”，时间长的称为“祭酒”。
Those beginners who came to learn the magic from him were called “Ghost Soldiers”, and those who had been there longer were called “Libationers.”

祭酒各领部众，众多者名曰理头。
祭酒各自领有部众，部众多的称为“理头”。
Each Libationer had his own followers, and those who had most followers were called “Head of Logics.”

皆校以诚信，不听欺妄，有病但令首过而已。
都以诚信作为考核标准，不接受欺妄的人，生了病时只让他们自首过错而已。
All students were judged by their loyalty and trustworthiness. A deceitful person was not accepted. If a follower was sick, he could only confess his own guilt, that’s all.

诸祭酒各起义舍于路，同之亭传，县置米肉以给行旅；
各祭酒分别在路边建设义舍，和政府的亭传一样，放着米和肉以供给往来的人。
Each libationer set up a stall on the street, like the government’s neighborhood system, where volunteers prepared rice and meat for those passers-by in need.

食者量腹取足，过多则鬼能病之。
吃的人按照自己的食量吃饱，多吃了鬼就会让他得病。
Whoever wanted the food ate to capacity. If you ate too much, though, the ghost would make you sick.

犯法者，先加三原，然后行刑。
犯法的人先给他三次赦免的机会，然后行刑。
If someone committed the crime of eating excessive amounts of food, he would be forgiven three times. From the fourth time on, he would be punished.

不置长吏，以祭酒为理，民夷信向。
不设置像政府那样的官吏，以祭酒为法官，汉朝百姓和少数民族群众都信奉皈依。
The group had no officials like those of the government. They used the libationer as judge. The public and many ethnic minorities believed in and converted to them.


朝廷不能讨，遂就拜鲁镇夷中郎将，领汉宁太守，通其贡献韩遂、马超之乱，关西民奔鲁者数万家。
朝廷没有能力征讨，于是索性授予张鲁镇夷中郎将的职位，兼任汉宁太守。让他往来道路向朝廷进贡。韩遂、马超作乱的时候，关西人民投奔张鲁的有几万家。当时有个人在地下挖到玉印，张鲁的各个部下想尊奉张鲁为汉宁王。
As the court was unable to suppress the group, the emperor appointed Zhang Lu Leader of Court Gentlemen with Defense Commandant of Yi, and also appointed him Governor of Hanning. The court allowed him to travel freely to pay tribute. During the period when Han Sui and Ma Chao rebelled, several tens of thousands of people in the Guangxi area sought refuge with Zhang Lu. At that time, someone from Zhang Lu’s army found a jade seal underground. His subordinates wanted to elect Zhang Lu King of Hanning.

鲁功曹阎圃谏曰："汉川之民，户出十万，四面险固，财富土沃。上匡天子，则为桓、文，次方窦融，不失富贵。今承制署置，执足斩断；遽称王号，必为祸先。”
张鲁的功曹阎圃劝说他：“汉川地区的百姓，人家超出十万，四面都是险固的地形，财物富裕土地肥沃。上帮助皇帝，就可以成为齐桓公、晋文公那样的人，退一步说可以像窦融一样，也不失富贵。现在秉承国家意旨设置官属任用自己人，其势力足以独霸一方。突然私自称王，一定会成为灾祸的开端。”
Yan Pu, the official in Zhang Lu’s Labor Section, suggested, “The population of Han and Chuan is about one hundred thousand. The terrain there is steep and solid. The people live prosperous lives, and the land is rich and fertile. If you assist His Majesty, you could reach a status similar to Duke Huan of Qi or Duke Wen of Jin. If you step back, you would be like Dou Rong, who lived a wealthy and prosperous life. Currently, the country favors your effort to establish government offices employing your own people. Your power and strength could make you a local despot. If you suddenly declare yourself king, it will certainly be the beginning of disaster.”

鲁从之。
张鲁听从了他。
Zhang Lu accepted his suggestion.

鲁自在汉川，垂三十年，闻曹操征之，至阳平，欲举汉中降
张鲁自从据有汉川将近三十年听说曹操来征讨他他跑到阳平关想要举汉中投降
For thirty years Zhang Lu occupied the areas of Han and Chuan When he heard that Cao Cao was coming to suppress him he fled to Yangping Pass intending to surrender Hanzhong

其弟卫不听，率众数万拒关固守
他弟弟张卫不听从率领部众几万人在阳平关固守
His younger brother Zhang Wei disobeyed leading tens of thousands of soldiers to guard Yangping Pass

操破卫，斩之
曹操攻破张卫并将他杀死
Cao Cao defeated Zhang Wei and killed him

鲁闻阳平已陷，将稽颡归降
张鲁听说阳平关已陷落想叩头归降
When Zhang Lu heard that Yangping Pass had fallen he wished to surrender by kowtowing

阎圃说曰：“今以急往，其功为轻；不如且依巴中，然后委质，功必多也。”
阎圃进计说现在因为形势紧急而投降功劳会很小不如暂时依附巴中然后再臣服这样功劳会更大
Yan Pu advised that if he surrendered now in haste the merit would be small and suggested first taking refuge in Bazhong and then submitting which would increase his merit

于是乃奔南山
张鲁听了建议便奔向南山
Thus Zhang Lu fled toward Nanshan Mountain

左右欲悉焚宝货仓库
他的部下想把所有宝物仓库烧掉
His subordinates wished to burn all the treasure stores

鲁曰：“本欲归命国家，其意未遂；今日之走，以避锋锐，非有恶意”
张鲁说我本来想归顺国家愿望未能实现今天逃走是为了避开战事并非怀有恶意
Zhang Lu said that he had intended to submit to the state but failed and that his escape today was only to avoid conflict without malicious intent

遂封藏而去
于是他将宝物封存完好后离开
Thus he sealed and stored the treasures properly before departing

操入南郑甚嘉之
曹操进入南郑后非常赞赏他
When Cao Cao entered Nanzheng he greatly praised this conduct

又以鲁本有善意，遣人慰安之
又因为张鲁对他本有善意曹操派人慰问安抚他
Believing Zhang Lu bore goodwill toward him Cao Cao sent envoys to comfort and reassure him

鲁即与家属出逆
张鲁随即带着家属出迎
Zhang Lu then came out with his family to welcome the envoy

拜镇南将军，封阆中侯，邑万户
他被授予镇南将军封为阆中侯食邑万户
He was appointed General of Defending the South and made Marquis of Langzhong with a fief of ten thousand households

将还中国，待以客礼
曹操将他带回京城待他以贵客之礼
Cao Cao brought him back to the capital and treated him with the courtesy of an honored guest

封鲁五子及阎圃等皆为列侯
张鲁的五个儿子和阎圃等人都被封为列侯
Zhang Lu’s five sons and Yan Pu were all granted the rank of marquis

鲁卒，谧曰原侯，子富嗣
张鲁死后谥号为原侯由他的儿子张富继承爵位
After Zhang Lu died he was posthumously titled Marquis of Yuan and his son Zhang Fu inherited the title
