马融字季长，扶风茂陵人也。将作大匠严之子。
马融字季长，扶风郡茂陵县人，将作大匠马严的儿子。
Ma Rong, style named Jichang, was a native of Maoling District of Fufeng Commandery. He was the son of Ma Yan, Director of the Directorate for the Palace Buildings.

为人美辞貌，有俊才。
他长得英俊，很会说话，有出众的才华。
He was very handsome and eloquent, and he possessed extraordinary talents.

初，京兆挚恂以儒术教授，隐于南山，不应征聘，名重关西。
起先的时候，京兆人挚恂以儒学教授学生，隐居在南山，对于朝廷的征聘都不接受，在关西有大名。
In early times, Zhi Xun, a Jingzhao native who taught students the school of Confucianism, lived in the South Mountain as a hermit and declined any offers of official positions from the imperial court. He was well-known in the Guanxi area.

融从其游学，博通经籍。
马融跟他学习，博通经籍。
Ma Rong studied under Zhi Xun and became very knowledgeable in the ancient classics.

恂奇融才，以女妻之。
挚恂赏识马融的才华，把女儿嫁给他。
Greatly appreciating his talents, Zhi Xun married his daughter to Ma Rong.

永初二年，大将军邓骘闻融名，召为舍人。
永初二年（公元108年），大将军邓骘听说了马融的名声，召他来担任舍人。
In the second year of the Yongchu era (108), Grand General Deng Zhi heard about Ma Rong's fame and recruited him to be Secretary.

非其好也，遂不应命，客于凉州武都、汉阳界中。
这不是马融喜欢的工作，于是就没有接受，寓居在凉州武都和汉阳之间。
This was not a job Ma wanted, so he declined the offer and temporarily remained in the area between Wudu and Hanyang in Liangzhou.

会羌虏飙起，边方扰乱，米谷踊贵，自关以西，道瑾相望。
刚好遇上羌人大肆侵犯汉朝，边疆混乱，粮食价格飞涨，从函谷关往西，路上到处是饿死的人。
At that time, the Qiangs launched unbridled attacks on the Han and caused chaos along the frontier; grain prices skyrocketed, and from Hangu Pass westward, starved corpses were seen lying everywhere.

融既饥困，乃悔而叹息，谓其友人曰：“古人有言：‘左手据天下之图，右手刎其喉，愚夫不为。’”
马融遭遇这样的饥困后，于是后悔叹息，对他的朋友说：“古人有句话：‘左手握着天下的地图，右手却想着刺他的喉咙，即使是笨蛋也不愿意这样的。’”
Upon encountering such signs of starvation, Ma sighed in regret and told his friend, “There is an old saying: ‘On the one hand, you ask a man to rule the world, and on the other hand, you tell him to slit his own throat—even a fool would not do such a thing.’”

“所以然者，生贵于天下也。”
“为什么这样，因为生命比天下还要重要。”
“Why? Because life itself is more precious than ruling the world.”

“今以曲俗咫尺之羞，灭无赀之躯，殆非老、庄所谓也。”
“现在不能忍受一点世俗的小小屈辱，而毁灭自己无价的身体，不符合老庄养生的道理。”
“Now, if I cannot endure a little worldly humiliation and instead destroy my priceless body, it certainly goes against the teachings of Laozi and Zhuangzi on preserving life.”

故往应骘召。
于是答应了邓骘的招贤。
As a result, he accepted Deng Zhi’s recruitment.

四年，拜为校书郎中，诣东观典校秘书。
永初四年（公元110年），马融被授予校书郎中的职务，到东观校勘皇家藏书。
In the fourth year of the Yongchu era (110), Ma Rong was appointed to be Director of Editors and went to the Imperial Eastern Library to edit the imperial collections.

是时，邓太后临朝，骘兄弟辅政。
这个时候邓太后管理朝政，邓骘兄弟辅政。
During this period, Empress Dowager Deng was in charge of the imperial power, while Deng Zhi and his brothers assisted her in governing.

而俗儒世士，以为文德可兴，武功宜废。
而世俗儒生和社会上的士人，认为国家文治应该兴起，军事应该废止。
Many Confucian scholars and other elites of the time thought that the country should revive its culture and civilization, and that military affairs should be abolished.

遂寝嵬狩之礼，息战陈之法，故猾贼从横，乘此无备。
于是停止了打猎练兵和战争布阵的制度，因此盗匪趁着国家没有有效的管理纷纷而起。
Therefore, they put an end to military training such as hunting and battle drills, and as a result, bandits took advantage of the unpreparedness and rose up in chaos.

融乃感激，以为文武之道，圣贤不坠，五才之用，无或可废。
马融于是有感于此，认为文武之道，圣贤不废止，金木水火土这五才的应用，不可以偏废。
Ma Rong was deeply moved and believed that sages never abandoned either the civil or the military path, and that the use of the five elements—metal, wood, water, fire, and earth—should never be neglected.

元初二年，上《广成颂》以讽谏。
元初二年（公元115年），他献上《广成颂》用以劝诫。
In the second year of the Yuanchu era (115), he submitted *The Eulogy to Guangcheng* to admonish Empress Dowager Deng and her family.

颂奏，忤邓氏，滞于东观，十年不得调。
这篇颂奏上去，违背了邓氏的意思，长期在东观任职，十年没有调动。
After the eulogy was submitted, it displeased the Deng family, and he was kept working in the Imperial Eastern Library for ten years without promotion.

因兄子丧，自劾归。
因为哥哥的儿子死了，马融自己弹劾自己，回家了。
When his brother’s son died, Ma Rong resigned from his position and returned home.

太后闻之，怒，谓融羞薄诏除，欲仕州郡，遂令禁锢之。
太后听说此事很生气，认为马融嫌皇帝封的官太小以为羞辱，想要担任州郡的官，于是命令把他禁锢不得做官。
When Empress Dowager heard about it, she became furious, thinking that Ma Rong felt humiliated by his low rank and sought a higher commandery position; thus, she ordered his arrest and forbade him from serving in government again.

太后崩，安帝亲政，召还郎署，复在讲部。
太后死后，安帝亲政，把马融召回郎署，又回到讲官的职位上
After Empress Dowager died, Emperor An took over the reins of the government and summoned Ma Rong back to the Bureau of Court Gentlemen, where he resumed his position as Lecturer.

出为河间王厩长史
出京担任河间王厩长史
Ma Rong later left the capital and was appointed Chief of the Stables for the King of Hejian.

时车驾东巡岱宗，融上《东巡颂》。帝奇其文，召拜郎中
当时皇帝东巡泰山，马融献上《东巡颂》，皇帝很欣赏他的文章，召回来授予郎中的官职
During that period, when Emperor An went east to visit Mount Tai, Ma Rong submitted the “Eulogy on the Imperial Inspection to the East”. The emperor admired his writing and summoned him back, appointing him Gentleman of the Interior.

及北乡侯即位，融移病去，为郡功曹。
等到北乡侯即皇帝位，马融托病辞职，担任郡的功曹
When the North Township Marquis ascended the throne, Ma Rong resigned on the pretext of illness and served in the Labor Section of his commandery.

阳嘉二年，诏举敦朴，城门校尉岑起举融，征诣公车，对策，拜议郎。
阳嘉二年，下诏推举敦朴，城门校尉岑起推举马融，用公车征召到京师，回答皇帝的策问，被授予议郎之职
In the second year of the Yangjia era, an imperial edict was issued to recommend honest and sincere men. Commandant of the Capital Gate Cen Qi recommended Ma Rong, and the emperor sent an imperial carriage to summon him. Ma Rong responded to the emperor’s questions and was appointed Court Gentleman for Consultation.

大将军梁商表为从事中郎，转武都太守。
大将军梁商推荐他担任从事中郎，调为武都太守
Grand General Liang Shang recommended him as Retainer of Inner Gentleman, and he was later transferred to be Governor of Wudu.

时西羌反叛，征西将军马贤与护羌校尉胡畴征之，而稽久不进。
当时西边的羌人反叛，征西将军马贤与护羌校尉胡畴征讨他们，却长期拖延不进攻
During that period, the Qiang people in the west rebelled. General of Western Mobilization Ma Xian and Protector Commandant of Qiang Hu Chou were sent to suppress them, but they delayed for a long time without advancing.

融知其将败，
马融知道他们将来肯定败亡，
Ma Rong knew they were going to fail in the future


上疏乞自效，曰：“今杂种诸羌，转相钞盗，宜及其未并，亟遣深入，破其支党。”
上疏皇帝请求自荐要为国家报效，说：“现在杂种各羌互相转掠抢劫，应该在他们还没有统一的时候，快速派兵深入，消灭他们的支党。”
so he submitted a letter to recommend himself to the emperor indicating that he wanted to serve the country.In the letter,he said，“At present the mixed-tribe Qiangs are taking turns raiding and plundering; we should, before they unite, urgently dispatch forces deep in to destroy their subordinate bands.”

“而马贤等处处留滞。”
“而马贤等人却迟延不进。”
“Yet Ma Xian and others are everywhere delaying and lingering.”

“羌胡百里望尘，千里听声，今逃匿避回，漏出其后，则必侵寇三辅，为民大害。”
“羌胡警觉性强，信息灵通，假设他们避开马贤前锋而迂回从马贤的后方钻出来，就一定会侵犯三辅地区，成为人民的大害。”
“The Qiang and Hu spy dust for a hundred li and hear news for a thousand; if they slip away and round behind, they will certainly raid the Three Metropolises and become a great scourge to the people.”

“臣愿请贤所不可用关东兵五千，裁假部队之号，尽力率厉，埋根行首，以先吏士。”
“我希望请给我马贤部下不用的关东兵五千，仅以假借小部队的名义，全力率兵出击，我愿以身先士卒为首。”
“I beg leave to request five thousand Guandong troops that Ma Xian cannot use, to borrow the name of a token force, and to lead them vigorously in person, taking the lead with the officers and soldiers.”

“三旬之中，必克破之。”
“三十天当中，一定把他们打败。”
“Within thirty days, I will surely destroy them.”

“臣少习学艺，不更武职，猥陈此言，必受诬罔之辜。”
“我年轻时读书，没有经历武职，说这些话，可能会被诬为妄言，承受罪名。”
“I studied letters in my youth and have no military office; I presumptuously state this and must expect to bear the blame of falsehood.”

昔毛遂厮养，为众所蚩，终以一言，克定从要。
以前毛遂是一个卑贱之人，被大家看不起，最终因为一句话，促成了楚国出兵救赵的盟约。
In the past Mao Sui, a lowly retainer despised by the crowd, by a single word secured the crucial alliance to have Chu march to aid Zhao.

臣惧贤等专守一城，言攻于西，而羌出于东，且其将士必有高克溃叛之变。
我怕马贤等人专守一城，说要攻西面，然而羌人却从东面出来，而且他的将士必有像春秋时高克溃叛那样的变故。
I fear Ma Xian and the like will hold one city, speak of attack to the west while the Qiangs come out eastward, and that his generals and troops will have a Gao Ke–style collapse and revolt.

朝廷不能用。
朝廷没有采纳马融的建议。
The court would not make use of him.


又陈：“星孛参、毕。参西方之宿，毕为边兵，至于分野，并州是也。西戎北狄，殆将起乎？宜备二方。”
又上书说：“参、毕出现彗星，参是西方的星宿，毕代表边疆有兵事，至于星宿对应的九州地域，就是并州。西面的戎，北面的狄，大概要起来闹事了吧！应该防备这两个地方。”
Ma Rong later submitted another letter and said, “Comets were seen in the direction of Orion and Hyades. Orion is a constellation in the west, and the Hyades indicate that there is a military affair on the frontier. The border region of these constellations corresponds to Bingzhou. The Rong in the west and the Di in the north are likely to rebel soon. We must prepare to defend these two regions.”

寻而陇西羌反，乌桓寇上郡，皆卒如融言。
不久陇西郡的羌人反叛，乌桓侵犯上郡，都和马融说的一样。
Not long after, the Qiangs of Longxi Commandery rebelled, and the Wuhuan invaded Shang Commandery, all exactly as Ma Rong had predicted.

三迁，桓帝时为南郡太守。
升职三次，桓帝时担任南郡太守。
Ma Rong was promoted three times and became Governor of Nan Commandery during the reign of Emperor Huan.

先是，融有事忤大将军梁冀旨，冀讽有司奏融在郡贪浊，免官，髡徙朔方。
此前，马融有事违背了大将军梁冀的意思，梁冀授意有关官吏弹劾马融在郡任上贪污，被免官，剃了发流放朔方郡。
Earlier, Ma Rong had offended Grand General Liang Ji, who instigated the officials to impeach Ma Rong for corruption in office, leading to his dismissal, hair shaving, and exile to Shuofang Commandery.

自刺不殊。
自杀没死。
He attempted suicide but failed.

得赦还，复拜议郎，重在东观著述，以病去官。
得到赦免回来，又授予议郎之职，重新到东观著述，因为生病离职。
He was later pardoned and returned, appointed again as Court Gentleman for Consultation, resumed his writing in the Imperial Eastern Library, and resigned due to illness.

融才高博洽，为世通儒，教养诸生，常有千数。
马融才华高超，学问博洽，是当世的通儒，所教育的学生时常有上千人。
Ma Rong was superbly talented, with broad and profound learning, and was regarded as a versatile Confucian scholar of his time, often teaching over a thousand students.

涿郡卢植、北海郑玄，皆其徒也。
涿郡人卢植、北海国郑玄，都是他的学生。
Lu Zhi from Zhuo Commandery and Zheng Xuan from Beihai State were both his students.

善鼓琴，好吹笛，达生任性，不拘儒者之节。
擅长鼓琴，喜好吹笛，旷达随性，不拘泥儒者的节度。
He was skilled at playing the zither and fond of the flute, being open-minded and spontaneous, unconstrained by the rigid propriety of Confucian scholars.

居宇器服，多存侈饰。
住的用的，大多华丽。
His residence and belongings were all richly adorned.

常坐高堂，施绛纱帐，前授生徒，后列女乐。
平常坐在高堂上，设置绛纱帐，绛纱帐前面教育学生，后面列席女子乐队。
He often sat on a high platform draped with crimson silk curtains, teaching students in front while female musicians played behind.

弟子以次相传，鲜有入其室者。
学生们按次序相互传授，很少有入室的。
His students took turns to learn and teach among themselves, and few ever entered his private chamber.

尝欲训《左氏春秋》。
曾经打算注释《左氏春秋》。
He once intended to annotate  Zuo’s Commentary on the Spring and Autumn Annals.

及见贾逵、郑众注，乃曰：“贾君精而不博，郑君博而不精，既精既博，吾何加焉？”
等到看见贾逵、郑众的注，于是说：“贾君精而不博，郑君博而不精。两个人加起来就又精又博，我还有什么可做的！”
When he read the commentaries by Jia Kui and Zheng Zhong, he said, “Master Jia is refined but not broad; Master Zheng is broad but not refined. Together they are both refined and broad—what could I add to that?”

但著《三传异同说》。
只写了《三传异同说》。
He only wrote *The Similarities and Differences among the Three Commentaries.*

注《孝经》、《论语》、《诗》、《易》、《三礼》、《尚书》、《列女传》、《老子》、《淮南子》、《离骚》。
注释《孝经》、《论语》、《诗》、《易》、《三礼》、《尚书》、《列女传》、《老子》、《淮南子》、《离骚》。
He annotated the  Classic of Filial Piety, The Analects, Book of Songs, Book of Changes, Three Rites, Book of Documents, Biographies of Virtuous Women, Laozi, Huainanzi, and  Encountering Sorrow.

所著赋、颂、碑、谏、书、记、表、奏、七言、琴歌、对策、遗令，凡二十一篇。
所著赋、颂、碑、谏、书、记、表、奏、七言、琴歌、对策、遗令，一共二十一篇。
He wrote twenty-one works in total, including rhapsodies, eulogies, epitaphs, admonitions, letters, records, memorials, reports, seven-character poems, zither songs, policy responses, and wills.


初，融惩于邓氏，不敢复违忤势家，遂为梁冀草奏李固，又作《大将军西第颂》，以此颇为正直所羞。
早先时候，马融得罪邓家因而以此为戒，不敢再得罪权势之家，于是替梁冀写奏书弹劾李固，又写了《大将军西第颂》，因此被正直的人看不起。
At an earlier time, Ma Rong had once offended the Deng family, and he took it as a warning, not daring to offend any powerful families again. He wrote a memorial on behalf of Liang Ji to impeach Li Gu and composed the *Eulogy to the Western Mansion of the Grand General*, for which he was despised by upright men.

年八十八，延熹九年，卒于家，遗令薄葬。
延熹九年（公元166年），八十八岁时在家去世，遗嘱中叫子孙为他薄葬。
He died at home at the age of eighty-eight in the ninth year of the Yanxi era (166), leaving a will instructing his descendants to bury him simply.

族孙日碑，献帝时位至太傅。
族孙马日碑，献帝时官至太傅。
His clansman Ma Ridan later served as Grand Tutor during Emperor Xian’s reign.

论曰：马融辞命邓氏，逡巡陇、汉之间，将有意于居贞乎？
论曰：马融推辞邓氏的征召，往来于陇、汉之间，难道是想要隐居终生吗？
Commentary: When Ma Rong declined Deng Zhi’s summons and wandered between the Long and Han regions, was he perhaps intent on living in seclusion?

既而羞曲士之节，惜不赀之躯，终以奢乐恣性，党附成讥，固知识能匡欲者鲜矣！
不久不以世俗的屈辱为羞，爱惜无价的身体，最终因为失去原则，党附梁冀而为人讥议，由此可知学识能匡正欲望的很少。
Soon afterward, he ceased to feel ashamed by worldly humiliation and cherished his priceless life, yet in the end, he indulged in luxury, attached himself to Liang Ji, and became a subject of ridicule—truly, few can use knowledge to restrain desire!

夫事苦则矜全之情薄；生厚故安存之虑深。
生活苦的人很少顾虑安全；生活好的人处处怕发生危险。
Those who live in hardship seldom think of self-preservation, while those who live in comfort are constantly worried about safety.

登高不惧者，胥靡之人也；坐不垂堂者，千金之子也。
登高不怕的，是刑徒那样的人；坐着不靠堂边屋檐下的，是富贵人家的子弟。
Those unafraid of climbing high are men condemned to labor; those who avoid sitting under the eaves are sons of wealthy families.

原其大略，归于所安而已矣。
考察其大致原因，遵循习惯而已。
In general, people merely act according to what they find comfortable.

物我异观，亦更相笑也。
生活不同的人互相讥笑，假使他们易地而处，也将同样互相讥笑。
People living in different ways mock one another—if their positions were exchanged, they would still laugh at each other just the same.


