《易》称“遁之时义大矣哉!”又曰：“不事王侯，高尚其事”。
《周易》说：“《遁》的时代意义真大啊!”又说：“不侍奉王侯，高尚自己的德行。”
In the Book of Changes, it is said, "The Dun Diagram is very significant to our time." It also notes, "Serve not kings or marquis, but cultivate one's own virtue."

是以尧称则天，不屈颍阳之高；武尽美矣，终全孤竹之絜。
因此尧被称为效法天，但是隐居颍阳的巢父、许由不接受他的位置；武王被称为尽美了，孤竹君的两个儿子伯夷、叔齐始终保全自己的高洁节操。
Therefore, though Yao was praised as a king who followed Heaven's Way, Chao Fu and Xu You, who were hermits living in Yingyang, would not agree to accept it when Yao abdicated. Even though King Wu was a perfect king, the two sons of Guzhu, Boyi and Shuqi, had always guarded their own lofty virtue.

自兹以降，风流弥繁，长往之轨未殊，而感致之数匪一。
从此以后，这样的风气更加兴盛，跟历史上的事迹没有区别，但何所感而致此的原因不止一种。
Since then, this style of living has become common practice. Though not different from other historical affairs, the reasons behind this were not singular but many.

或隐居以求其志，或回避以全其道，或静己以镇其躁，或去危以图其安，或垢俗以动其概，或鄙物以激其清。
有的隐居以追求理想，有的回避以保全道德，有的使自己心静以制伏躁动，有的离开危险以寻求安全，有的愤嫉世俗污垢以树立节概，有的鄙视富贵以激扬清节。
Some became hermits in order to pursue ideals. Some hid to protect their morality, or used solitude to calm themselves and suppress anxiety. Some chose solitude to escape danger and to find safety. Others were simply cynical-minded. They detested the world and despised wealth and power. Thus, they wished to establish virtue while encouraging purity and uprightness.

然观其甘心畎亩之中，憔悴江海之上，岂必亲鱼鸟，乐林草哉?亦云性分所至而已。
但看他们甘心在田野之中，憔悴于江海之上，难道一定是要亲近鱼鸟、游乐林草么?也不过是自己的性情追求而已。
When we observe that such hermits were willing to live a vagrant life among wild fields and to pine away in the countryside, we must wonder whether they truly wanted to be intimate with the fishes and birds, or to enjoy forests and wilderness. It seems they lived in solitude only to indulge a certain temperament.

故蒙耻之宾，屡黜不去其国；蹈海之节，千乘莫移其情。
所以柳下惠三次被罢黜而不离开故国；鲁仲连即使给他千乘的赏赐，也不会改变他的志向。
That was exactly the reason why Liu Xiahui did not choose to leave his country, though he was removed from his posts three times. Though a king would have rewarded Lu Zhonglian one thousand carriages, he would not change his mind at all.


适使矫易去就，则不能相为矣。彼虽砼砼有类沽名者，然而蝉蜕嚣埃之中，自致寰区之外，异夫饰智巧以逐浮利者乎!
一留一去，是不能互易的。他们清高正直好像是追求外在的名气，但是摆脱污染、腾身世俗之外，跟那些耍小聪明以追求浮利的人是不一样的!
Both men were aloof and upright, which made it appear as if they pursued worldly fame. In fact, both men broke away from corruption, transcending worldly affairs. They were different from those who liked to be clever and play tricks to gain temporary benefits.

荀卿有言曰：“志意修则骄富贵，道义重则轻王公也。”
荀子说：“修养志向意趣就能傲视富贵，重视道义就能轻视王公。”
Xunzi said, "If one cultivates one's mind and interests, he naturally disdains wealth and power; if one is righteous and truly values the Way, he despises status and does not worship the rank of either marquis or king."

汉室中微，王莽篡位，士之蕴藉义愤甚矣。
汉朝中期微弱，王莽篡位，士大夫对此心怀很大的义愤。
In the middle period of the Han Dynasty, the government became weak and Wang Mang usurped the throne. The court scholar-officials were distressed and furious.

是时裂冠毁冕相携持而去之者，盖不可胜数。
这个时期，把官服官帽撕裂、相互携手而离开不愿做官的，不可胜数。
During that period, innumerable people clasped hands, ripped their official caps and robes, and abandoned their posts.

扬雄曰：“鸿飞冥冥，弋者何篡焉?”言其违患之远也。
扬雄说：“鸿雁飞得高，想射杀它们的人怎么能得到呢?”这是说要远离患难。
Yang Xiong said, "Huge swans and geese fly high. To those who want to shoot and kill them, I ask, how can they be reached?" In other words, one should keep a good distance from danger and calamity.

光武侧席幽人，求之若不及。旌帛蒲车之所征贲，相望于岩中矣。
光武帝不正坐以等待隐居的贤人，就怕求不到，征召聘请隐士的旌帛蒲车，山林之中到处都是。
Emperor Guangwu always kept a vacant seat on his left for a hermit-sage to come, but he was afraid that the seat would never be occupied. Therefore, gift-banners, fine silks, and rush-wagons used to invite hermits were seen throughout mountains and forests.

若薛方、逢萌聘而不肯至；严光、周党、王霸至而不能屈。
像薛方、逢萌他们，聘请但不肯来；严光、周党、王霸，来了但不接受官职。
Hermits like Xue Fang and Feng Meng were invited, but they declined the offer. Yan Guang, Zhou Dang, and Wang Ba accepted the invitation, but declined official posts.

群方咸遂，志士怀仁，斯固所谓“举逸民，天下归心”者乎!
百姓顺服，有志之士怀抱仁义，这大概就是所谓的“推举隐士而天下人归心”吧!
The people submitted to the throne, and ambitious men became benevolent and righteous. This was probably "to praise hermits and recommend to use them so that people in the world will follow you."

肃宗亦礼郑均而征高凤，以成其节。
肃宗也礼待郑均而征召高凤，以成就他们的节操。
Emperor Su treated Zheng Jun with courtesy, summoned Gao Feng to the court, so that both could acquire virtue.

自后帝德稍衰，邪孽当朝，处子耿介，羞与卿相等列，至乃抗愤而不顾，多失其中行焉。
后来帝王德政逐渐衰微，奸邪当朝，隐士耿介，把跟卿相同朝为官看作羞耻，甚至抗愤而去不顾国家，大多失去中庸的道理。
Later, the emperor's benevolent rule became weak, and evil flatterers controlled the court. Geng Jie, a hermit, thought that serving at court with such people would be shameful. So angry was he at the offer to serve at court that he left the country entirely. This was a case of missing the doctrine of the Middle Way.

盖录其绝尘不反，同夫作者，列之此篇。
记录那些隐居不出与见机而作的人，列在这一篇里。
In this section, we have mentioned those who were recluses and not willing to serve, and also those who seized the opportunity to serve.