张让者，颍川人；赵忠者，安平人也。少皆给事省中，桓帝时为小黄门。
张让是颍川郡人；赵忠是安平县人。年轻时都在宫中供职，桓帝时担任小黄门。
Zhang Rang was a native of Yingchuan Commandery, and Zhao Zhong was a native of Anping District. When both were young, they served in the palace.

忠以与诛梁冀功封都乡侯。延熹八年，黜为关内侯，食本县租千斛。
赵忠因为参与诛杀梁冀的功劳被封为都乡侯。延熹八年(公元165年)，降级为关内侯，每年享受安平县租税一千斛。
Zhao Zhong was awarded the title of Chief Marquis of the Township due to his contribution to the execution of Liang Ji. In the eighth year of the Yanxi era (165), he was demoted to the rank of Guannei Marquis. He enjoyed an endowment of one thousand hu of grains yearly, which was gathered through taxation from Anping District.

灵帝时，让、忠并迁中常侍、封列侯，与曹节、王甫等相为表里。
灵帝时，张让、赵忠一起升中常侍，封为列侯，与曹节、王甫等人相互勾结。
During the reign of Emperor Ling, both Zhang Rang and Zhao Zhong were promoted to the posts of Palace Attendants-in-ordinary at the same time, and had various titles bestowed on them as well. They colluded with Cao Jie and Wang Fu.

节死后，忠领大长秋。让有监奴典任家事，交通货赂，威形显赫。
曹节死后，赵忠兼任大长秋。张让有个大管家主持他的家事，收受贿赂，威势显赫。
After Cao Jie died, Zhao Zhong was appointed Director of Palace Domestic Service. The head housekeeper to whom Zhang Rang entrusted household affairs often received bribes, and held much power and influence.

扶风人孟佗，资产饶赡，与奴朋结，倾竭馈问，无所遗爱。
扶风郡人孟佗，家境富裕，与张让的家奴们交结，倾其所有赠送他们财物，连自己心爱的东西都不保留。
Meng Tuo, a native of Fufeng Commandery, was from a well-to-do family, and he befriended Zhang Rang's servants. He often gave these servants whatever he owned. Even things he loved very much were offered as gifts.

奴咸德之。问佗曰：“君何所欲?力能办也。”曰：“吾望汝曹为我一拜耳”
奴仆们都很感激他，就问孟佗：“您想要什么?我们都能为你办到。”孟佗说：“我只希望你们能拜我一下而已。”
The servants were very grateful to him, so they said, “Whatever you want, we can get it for you."Meng Tuo said,"I only wish you could kowtow to me once."


时宾客求谒让者，车恒数百千两，佗时诣让，后至，不得进。
当时许多宾客前来求见张让，来往车马常达数百数千辆，孟佗一次来访迟到，起初不得入内。
At that time many guests sought an audience with Zhang Rang; hundreds or even thousands of carriages arrived, and when Meng Tuo once came late he was at first not admitted.

监奴乃率诸苍头，迎拜于路，遂共举车入门。
张让的大监家奴便率领众苍头到路上迎接，跪拜后抬车一同进门。
Zhang Rang’s chief steward led the household servants out to greet him, they kowtowed on the road, and then carried his carriage into the gate together.

宾客咸惊，谓佗善于让，皆争以珍玩赂之。
宾客们都惊讶，认为孟佗与张让关系亲近，纷纷以珍玩贿赂他。
The guests were astonished, assumed Meng Tuo had Zhang Rang’s favor, and competed to bribe him with rare gifts.

佗分以遗让，让大喜，遂以佗为凉州刺史。
孟佗分赠一部分给张让，张让大为喜悦，遂任命孟佗为凉州刺史。
Meng Tuo gave part of the gifts to Zhang Rang, who was greatly pleased and appointed Meng Tuo Governor of Liangzhou.

是时，让、忠及夏恽、郭胜、孙璋、毕岚、栗嵩、段珪、高望、张恭、韩悝、宋典十二人皆为中常侍，封侯贵宠，父兄子弟布列州郡，所在贪残，为人蠹害。
当时张让、赵忠以及夏恽、郭胜、孙璋、毕岚、栗嵩、段珪、高望、张恭、韩悝、宋典等十二人都任中常侍，封侯受宠，他们的父兄子弟分布在各州郡，任所为官贪残，成为地方祸害。
At that time twelve men—Zhang Rang, Zhao Zhong, Xia Yun, Guo Sheng, Sun Zhang, Bi Lan, Li Song, Duan Gui, Gao Wang, Zhang Gong, Han Kui, and Song Dian—served as Palace Attendants-in-ordinary, held marquisates and favor, placed relatives across the provinces, and acted corruptly as local scourges.

黄巾既作，盗贼糜沸。
黄巾起义之后，盗贼四起，社会动荡不安。
After the Yellow Turban uprising, banditry surged and disorder spread.

郎中中山张钧上书曰：“窃惟张角所以能兴兵作乱，万人所以乐附之者，其源皆由十常侍多放父兄子弟婚亲宾客，典据州郡，辜榷财利，侵掠百姓。百姓之冤，无所告诉，故谋议不轨，聚为盗贼。宜斩十常侍，县头南郊，以谢百姓，...”
郎中字中山的张钧上书说：张角能兴兵作乱、万人乐附，其根源在于十常侍任用父兄子弟和婚亲宾客掌控州郡，搜刮财物，侵掠百姓，使民无处申冤，因而聚为盗贼，宜斩十常侍以示谢罪。
Zhang Jun of Zhongshan memorialized: he argued that Zhang Jiao’s ability to raise an army and attract followers stemmed from the Ten Attendants placing fathers, brothers, sons, relatives, and guests in control of commanderies, plundering wealth and oppressing the people; with no channel for redress, the people banded together as rebels, and thus the Ten Attendants should be executed as an atonement to the people.


又遣使者布告天下，可不须师旅，而大寇自消。
皇帝派遣使者通告天下，可以不派军队镇压，盗贼自会消散。
The emperor sent messengers to announce to the whole country, saying that there was no need to dispatch troops, and the rebels would naturally disperse.

天子以钧章示让等，皆免冠徒跣，顿首乞自致洛阳诏狱，并出家财以助军费。
皇帝把张钧的奏章给张让等人看，他们都脱帽赤足，叩头请求自赴洛阳皇家监狱，并献出家产以资军费。
The emperor showed Zhang Jun’s memorial to Zhang Rang and the others; they all removed their hats, went barefoot, kowtowed, and begged to present themselves to the imperial prison at Luoyang, offering their personal wealth to support the military.

有诏皆冠履视事如故。
皇帝下诏命他们恢复戴帽穿鞋，照常处理公事。
The emperor issued an edict ordering them to put on their hats and shoes and continue official duties as before.

帝怒钧曰：“此真狂子也!十常侍固当有一人善者不?”
皇帝对张钧大发雷霆，说：“这真是个狂人啊！十常侍中难道就没有一个好人吗？”
The emperor angrily said to Zhang Jun, “This man is truly mad! Among the Ten Attendants-in-ordinary, is there not even one who is good?”

钧复重上，犹如前章，辄寝不报。
张钧再次上奏，内容与前章相同，皇帝就不再答复。
Zhang Jun submitted another report with the same content as before, but the emperor suppressed it without reply.

诏使廷尉、侍御史考为张角道者，御史承让等旨，遂诬奏钧学黄巾道，收掠死狱中。
皇帝下诏令廷尉和侍御史查问信奉张角教的人，御史受张让等人的授意，诬告张钧学黄巾道，将其抓入狱中拷打致死。
An edict was issued for the Chamberlain for Law Enforcement and the Attendant Censor to investigate those who followed Zhang Jiao’s teachings. The Attendant Censor, acting under the orders of Zhang Rang and his fellows, falsely accused Zhang Jun of practicing the Yellow Turban teachings, arrested him, and he died under interrogation in prison.

而让等实多与张角交通。
实际上，张让等人与张角确有往来。
In fact, many of Zhang Rang’s circle actually had dealings with Zhang Jiao.

后中常侍封谓、徐奉事独发觉，坐诛。
后来只有中常侍封谓、徐奉与张角的交往被揭发，因此被处死。
Later, only the interactions between Zhang Jiao and the Attendants-in-ordinary Feng Wei and Xu Feng were discovered, and they were executed.

帝因怒诘让等曰：“汝曹常言党人欲为不轨，皆令禁锢，或有伏诛。今党人更为国用，汝曹反与张角通，为可斩未?”
皇帝因此愤怒，质问张让等人：“你们常说党人图谋不轨，都下令禁锢，甚至有被处死的。如今这些人还在为国家效力，而你们反而与张角来往，这难道不该斩首吗？”
The emperor, enraged, scolded Zhang Rang and the others: “You always claimed that members of factions plotted rebellion, so you imprisoned them, and some were executed. Now those people serve the state, yet you have befriended Zhang Jiao—should you not be beheaded?”

皆叩头云：“故中常待王甫、侯览所为。”
他们都叩头说：“这些都是前任中常侍王甫、侯览所为。”
They kowtowed and replied, “These matters were done by the former Attendants-in-ordinary Wang Fu and Hou Lan.”

帝乃止。
皇帝于是没有再追究。
The emperor then dropped the matter.


明年，南宫灾，让、忠等说帝令敛天下田亩税十钱，以修宫室，发太原、河东、狄道诸郡材木及文石。
第二年，南宫发生火灾，张让、赵忠等人劝皇帝下令多征天下田亩，每亩十钱税，用于修缮宫室，并征发太原、河东、狄道各郡的优良木材和纹饰石料。
In the following year, a fire occurred in the Southern Palace. Zhang Rang and Zhao Zhong persuaded the emperor to levy a land tax of ten coins per mu throughout the empire to fund palace repairs, and to requisition fine timber and patterned stone from the commanderies of Taiyuan, Hedong, and Didao.

每州郡部送至京师，黄门常侍辄令谴呵不中者，因强折贱买，十分雇一；因复货之于宦官，复不为即受，材木遂至腐积，宫室连年不成。
每次州郡将物资送到京师，黄门常侍就责骂运送不合格者，强行低价收购，只按十分之一的价格成交；再转卖给宦官，而宦官又拖延收货，木材因此堆积腐烂，宫室多年无法完成。
Whenever the commanderies delivered the materials to the capital, the eunuch Attendants-in-ordinary of the Imperial Gate would scold carriers whose supplies did not meet standards, force them to sell at one-tenth the value, and then resell the materials to eunuchs who deliberately delayed purchases, causing timber to rot and palace construction to remain incomplete for years.

刺史、太守，复增私调，百姓呼嗟。
刺史和太守又私自增加征调，百姓哀叹。
Regional Inspectors and Governors further made private requisitions, causing lamentation among the populace.

凡诏所征求，皆令西园驺密约敕，号曰中使，恐动州郡，多受赇赂。
凡是皇帝下诏征调的物资，都派西园驺卒暗中传达，称为“中使”，以恐吓州郡官员，并多收受贿赂。
All supplies demanded by imperial edicts were secretly delivered by Grooms of the Western Garden called “Palace Envoys,” who intimidated regional officials and accepted numerous bribes.

刺史、二千石及茂才、孝廉迁除，皆责助军、修宫钱，大郡至二三千万，余各有差。
刺史、二千石官员及茂才、孝廉升迁者，都被责令交纳助军费和修宫费，大郡达到二三千万钱，其余按等级差别。
Whenever Regional Inspectors, officials with a salary of 2,000 bushels, or promoted Cultivated Talents and Filial-Incumbent candidates assumed office, they were required to provide funds for military and palace construction; large commanderies had to pay 20–30 million coins, others according to their rank.

当之官者，皆先至西园谐价，然后得去，有钱不毕者，或至自杀。
上任者，都先到西园议定价格后才能赴任，若缴款不全，有的甚至自杀。
Officials assuming new posts had to first negotiate payment at the Western Garden; those unable to pay in full sometimes committed suicide.

其守清者，乞不之官，皆迫遣之。
那些保持清廉的人请求不上任，也都被迫前往。
Those who wished to remain honest and declined their appointments were still forced to assume office.

时巨鹿太守河内司马直新除，以有清名，减责三百万。
当时，巨鹿太守、河内人司马直新上任，因为名声清廉，减少任务三百万钱。
At that time, Sima Zhi, newly appointed Governor of Julu from Henei, known for his integrity, had his obligations reduced by three million coins.


直被诏，怅然曰："为民父母，而反割剥百姓，以称时求，吾不忍也!”辞疾，不听，行至孟津，上书极陈当世之失，古今祸败之戒，即吞药自杀。书奏，帝为暂绝修宫钱。
司马直接到诏书，惆怅地说："作为百姓父母官，却要反而去剥削百姓，以满足国家当下的需求，我不忍这样做。”于是托病辞职，朝廷不允。走到孟津，上书详细陈述当世政治失误及古今祸乱教训，随后吞服毒药自杀。奏报上去，皇帝因此暂时停止征集修宫钱。
When Sima Zhi received the order,he said in depression：“I serve as a parent to the people, yet I am forced to exploit them to meet the demands of the state. I cannot endure this.” He feigned illness to resign, but the court refused. At Mengjin, he submitted a memorial meticulously detailing current political failures and lessons from past disasters, then committed suicide by poison. Upon receiving the memorial, the emperor temporarily suspended the levy for palace construction.

又造万金堂于西园，引司农金钱、缯帛，仞积其中。又还河间买田宅，起第观。帝本侯家，宿贫，每叹桓帝不能作家居，故聚为私臧，复臧寄小黄门、常侍钱各数千万。常云：“张常侍是我公，赵常侍是我母。”宦官得志、无所惮畏，并起第宅，拟则宫室。
又在西园建造万金堂，用司农衙门的金钱和缯帛堆积其中。又回河间购买田宅，建造府第楼观。灵帝出身侯家，家境曾贫困，常叹桓帝不能营造家居，因此开始聚敛私财，并在小黄门、常侍处寄存数千万钱。他常说：“张常侍是我父，赵常侍是我母。”宦官得势，无所顾忌，也建造府宅，规格与宫室相当。
Emperor Ling also constructed the Ten Thousand Gold Hall in the Western Garden, filling it with money, silk, and cloth from the Bureau of Treasury. He returned to Hejian to buy land and mansions, building residences and towers. Emperor Ling, originally from a marquis family, had been poor in his youth and often lamented Emperor Huan’s inability to maintain a family estate. Hence, he amassed private wealth and stored tens of millions in the quarters of the Junior Attendants of Eunuchs and Attendants-in-ordinary. He often said, “Attendant-in-ordinary Zhang is my father, and Attendant-in-ordinary Zhao is my mother.” The eunuchs, emboldened by their power, built mansions and gardens on par with the imperial palace.

帝常登永安候台，宦官恐其望见居处，乃使中大人尚但谏曰：“天子不当登高，登高则百姓虚散。”自是不敢复升台榭。
灵帝经常登永安宫的候台，宦官担心他会看到自己的住宅，于是派中大人尚但劝谏：“皇帝不应登高，登高会使百姓四散。”此后皇帝不再登台榭。
Emperor Ling often climbed the observatory at Yongan Palace. The eunuchs, fearing he might see their residences, had the venerable official Shang Dan advise: “Your Majesty should not climb high; if an emperor ascends high, the people will scatter.” From then on, the emperor did not ascend the towers again.

明年，遂使钩盾令宋典缮修南宫玉堂。又使掖庭令毕岚铸铜人四列于仓龙、玄武阙。又铸四钟，皆受二千斛。
第二年，皇帝命钩盾令宋典修缮南宫玉堂，又派掖庭令毕岚在仓龙阙、玄武阙铸造四列铜人，又铸四口大钟，每口钟容量二千斛。
The following year, Emperor Ling ordered Song Dian, Director of the Imperial Guard, to renovate the Jade Hall of the Southern Palace. He also instructed Bi Lan, Director of Palace Discipline, to cast four rows of bronze statues at the Canglong and Xuanwu gates, and to cast four large bronze bells, each with a capacity of two thousand hu.


县于玉堂及云台殿前。
都挂在玉堂和云台殿前。
Statues were hung at both the Jade Hall and the Cloud Terrace Palace.

又铸天禄虾蟆，吐水于平门外桥东，转水入宫。
又在平门外桥东铸造天禄虾蟆，能吐出水，水流转入宫中。
He also had a Heavenly Blessing Toad cast by the east side of Pingmen Outer Bridge, which spouted water into the palace.

又作翻车渴乌，施于桥西，用洒南北郊路，以省百姓洒道之费。
又造了翻车、渴乌，安置在桥西，用来清洒南北郊路，以减少给百姓清洒道路的费用。
Waterwheels and devices called “Turning Carts” and “Thirsty Crows” were set up on the west side of the bridge to sprinkle water along the northern and southern suburban roads, reducing the burden on common people.

又铸四出文钱，钱皆四道。
又铸造四瓣花纹钱，钱上都有四道纹路。
He also minted coins with four-lined cross patterns.

识者窃言侈虐已甚，刑象兆见，此钱成，必四道而去。
有识之士私下说太过奢侈放肆了，天下大乱的征兆已经出现，这种钱币造成，百姓必定四道而散。
Intellectuals privately remarked that this extravagance and indulgence was excessive; once such coins circulated, the people would scatter in all directions.

及京师大乱，钱果流布四海。
等到京师大乱的时候，这种钱果然流布四海。
When chaos broke out in the capital, these coins indeed spread throughout the empire.

复以忠为车骑将军，百余日罢。
又用赵忠担任车骑将军，一百多天后被罢免。
Zhao Zhong was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry, but was removed after a little over a hundred days.

六年，帝崩。
六年（公元189年），灵帝去世。
In the sixth year (189 CE), Emperor Ling died.

中军校尉袁绍说大将军何进，令诛中官以悦天下。
中军校尉袁绍向大将军何进进计，叫他杀宦官以取悦天下百姓。
Yuan Shao, Commandant of the Middle Army, suggested to General-in-Chief He Jin that he should kill the eunuchs to please the people.

谋泄，让、忠等因进入省，遂共杀进。
这个谋划泄露，张让、赵忠等人趁何进入宫，于是一起杀了何进。
The conspiracy was uncovered, so Zhang Rang, Zhao Zhong, and others took the opportunity to enter the palace and assassinated He Jin.

而绍勒兵斩忠，捕宦官无少长悉斩之。
袁绍带兵杀了赵忠，抓捕宦官不问老少全部杀了。
Yuan Shao led troops to kill Zhao Zhong and arrested and executed all the eunuchs, old and young.

让等数十人劫质天子走河上。
张让等几十个人劫持皇帝作为人质逃到黄河边。
Zhang Rang and several dozen others kidnapped the emperor and fled to the bank of the Yellow River as hostages.

追急，让等悲哭，辞曰：“臣等殄灭，天下乱矣，惟陛下自爱!”
追兵急迫，张让等人悲哭，向皇帝告别说：“我们死了，天下也大乱了，希望陛下自爱!”
Being pressed by pursuing troops, they wept and said farewell to the emperor: “We are going to die, and the world will fall into chaos. Please take care of yourself, Your Majesty!”

皆投河而死。
都投黄河而死。
They all threw themselves into the Yellow River and died.

