陈留董祀妻者，同郡蔡邕之女也，名琰，字文姬。博学有才辩，又妙于音律。
陈留郡董祀的妻子，是同郡蔡邕的女儿，名琰，字文姬。博学有才辩，又精通音律。
Cai Yan, style named Wenji, was the wife of Dong Si from Chenliu Commandery. She was the daughter of Cai Yong, one of his townsmen. She was erudite, talented, eloquent, and skilled in music.

适河东卫仲道，夫亡无子，归宁于家。
嫁给河东人卫仲道。丈夫去世没有子女，回到娘家。
She married Wei Zhongdao, a native of Hedong. Her husband died childless, so she returned to her parents’ home.

兴平中，天下丧乱，文姬为胡骑所获，没于南匈奴左贤王。在胡中十二年，生二子。
兴平年间，天下丧乱，蔡文姬被胡人骑兵俘获，成为南匈奴左贤王的妻，在匈奴十二年，生了两个儿子。
During the Xingping era, when the world was in turmoil, Cai Wenji was captured by barbarian horsemen and became the wife of the Left Wise King of the Southern Xiongnu. She lived there for twelve years and bore two sons.

曹操素与邕善，痛其无嗣，乃遣使者以金璧赎之，而重嫁于祀。
曹操一向和蔡邕关系好，对蔡邕没有后嗣感到很痛惜，于是派使者用金璧把蔡文姬赎回来，再把她嫁给董祀。
Cao Cao had long been on good terms with Cai Yong and grieved that he had no heir. He therefore sent envoys with gold and jade to ransom Cai Wenji and then remarried her to Dong Si.

祀为屯田都尉，犯法当死，文姬诣曹操请之。
董祀担任屯田都尉，犯了法应判死刑，蔡文姬到曹操那里求情。
Dong Si served as a Commandant of Military Farms. He broke the law and was sentenced to death, so Cai Wenji went to beg Cao Cao for mercy.

时公卿名士及远方使驿坐者满堂。操谓宾客曰：“蔡伯喈女在外，今为诸君见之。”
当时公卿名士以及从远方来的使者济济一堂。曹操对他的客人们说：“蔡伯喈的女儿在外面，今天我就为大家引见她。”
At that time, the hall was full of renowned scholars and envoys from distant regions. Cao Cao said to his guests, “The daughter of Cai Bojie is outside; today, I will present her to you all.”

及文姬进，蓬首徒行，叩头请罪，音辞清辩，旨甚酸哀，众皆为改容。
等到蔡文姬进来，头发蓬松，赤着脚，叩头请罪，声音言辞清脆明晰，内容非常酸楚哀伤，大家都为之动情。
Cai Wenji entered with unkempt hair and bare feet. She kowtowed and pleaded for mercy. Her voice was clear and eloquent, and her words were so sorrowful that everyone was deeply moved.

操曰：“诚实相矜，然文状已去，奈何?”
曹操说：“我确实很同情你，但是处死文书已经下达，怎么办呢?”
Cao Cao said, “I truly sympathize with you, but the execution decree has already been sent—what can be done?”

文姬曰：“明公厩马万匹，虎士成林，何惜疾足一骑，而不济垂死之命乎?”
蔡文姬说：“您马厩里有上万匹马，勇猛之士不可胜数，难道吝惜一匹快马、一个骑士，而不挽救一条将死的生命吗?”
Cai Wenji replied, “Your stables hold ten thousand horses, and your warriors are as numerous as a forest—would you begrudge one swift horse and rider to save a dying life?”

操感其言，乃追原祀罪。时且寒，赐以头巾履袜。
曹操被她的话感动，于是派人追赶送文书的人，赦免了董祀的罪。当时天气将寒，曹操赐给她头巾、鞋子和袜子。
Cao Cao was moved by her words. He ordered the messenger to be recalled and pardoned Dong Si’s crime. As the weather was turning cold, Cao Cao bestowed upon her a headscarf, shoes, and socks.

操因问曰：“闻夫人家，先多坟籍，犹能忆识之不?”
曹操于是问她：“听说夫人家里，以前有很多书籍，还能记得起吗?”
Cao Cao then asked, “I heard your family once possessed many books—can you still remember them?”

文姬曰：“昔亡父赐书四千许卷，流离涂炭，罔有存者，今所诵忆裁四百余篇耳。”
蔡文姬说：“以前先父留下来的书有四千多卷，经过变乱，没有保存下来的。现在还能记忆背诵的，只有四百余篇了。”
Cai Wenji replied, “My late father once possessed over four thousand scrolls, but in the chaos of war, none were preserved. I can now recall only about four hundred pieces.”

操曰：“今当使十吏就夫人写之。”
曹操说：“现在我就派十个小吏随着夫人把它默写下来。”
Cao Cao said, “Then I shall send ten scribes to transcribe what you remember.”

文姬曰：“妾闻男女之别，礼不亲授，乞给纸笔，真草唯命。”
蔡文姬说：“我听说男女之别，按照礼制不能亲自授受，请给我纸和笔，要用真书写，还是用草书写，都听你吩咐。”
Cai Wenji said, “According to propriety, men and women should not teach each other directly. Please give me brush and paper—whether in regular or cursive script, I shall write as you command.”

于是缮书送之，文无遗误。
于是把书默写好送给曹操，文字没有遗漏和错误的。
Thus she copied the texts and presented them to Cao Cao—without a single mistake or omission.


后感伤乱离，追怀悲愤，作诗二章，其辞曰：
文姬感伤自己经历乱离，追忆往事悲伤郁闷，作诗二章。
Later, Cai Wenji, sorrowful over the chaos and separation and full of grief, composed two poems, whose words are as follows:

汉季失权柄，董卓乱天常。
汉朝末年国家权力失控，董卓扰乱天道纲常。
At the end of the Han the imperial power was lost and Dong Zhuo disturbed Heaven’s ordinances.

志欲图篡弑，先害诸贤良。
他心中图谋篡位弑君，先害良善贤能之人。
He intended to usurp and slay; first he harmed the virtuous and worthy.

逼迫迁旧邦，拥主以自强。
他逼迫迁都，挟持天子以自强。
He forced the capital to be moved and held the sovereign to strengthen himself.

海内兴义师，欲共讨不祥。
天下兴起正义之师，欲同讨此不祥之人。
Across the land righteous armies rose, intending together to punish the miscreant.

卓众来东下，金甲耀日光。
卓众东进，金甲闪耀如日光。
Dong Zhuo’s forces marched east; their armor shone like the sunlight.

平土人脆弱，来兵皆胡羌。
平原之人体质脆弱，而来犯之兵多为胡羌。
The plain-dwellers were frail, while the invading troops were hardy Hu and Qiang warriors.

猎野围城邑，所向悉破亡。
如猎者围攻城邑，所向之处无不沦亡。
They hunted the countryside and besieged cities; wherever they turned, there was ruin.

斩截无孑遗，尸骸相撑拒，马边悬男头，马后载妇女。
所斩割者无一遗留，尸骸堆积相互支撑，马旁挂着男头，车后载着妇女。
They cut down all without leaving one alive; corpses piled and propped one another, men’s heads hung at horses’ sides and wagons carried women.

长驱西入关，回路险且阻。
长驱西进入函谷关，道路回环险阻。
They rode west through Hangu Pass; the route back was dangerous and obstructed.

还顾邈冥冥，肝脾为烂腐。
回首顾望，只见茫茫一片，心肝俱为悲痛如烂腐。
Looking back all was distant and vague; my liver and spleen felt as if rotted with grief.

所略有万计，不得令屯聚。
被掠者计有万许，不能令其聚集。
Those taken numbered in the tens of thousands and were not allowed to assemble together.

或有骨肉俱，欲言不敢语。
即便有骨肉相聚，想说话也不敢发声。
Even when kin remained together, they dared not speak.

失意机微间，辄言毙降虏。
稍有不顺或机变，即时言说要斩死俘虏。
At the slightest mishap or suspicion they would at once pronounce captives to be executed.

要当以亭刃，我曹不活汝。
他们说要以亭刃杀之，扬言“我等不留你性命”。
They proclaimed, “We will use the hatchet—we shall not spare your life.”

岂复惜性命，不堪其詈骂。
哪有人还顾惜性命，无法忍受那等辱骂。
Who would still cherish life under such insults and abuse?

或便加棰杖，毒痛参并下。
或便动棍棒并加毒刑，使之痛苦交加。
Sometimes they added beatings and tortures, inflicting mingled pain and poison.

旦则号泣行
白日里号啕哭行
By day we cried aloud as we walked;

夜则悲吟坐。欲死不能得，欲生无一可。彼苍者何辜？乃遭此厄祸！
夜晚就悲吟独坐，想死却不能，想活又无一可恋。老天啊！我们究竟犯了什么罪，竟遭此灾祸！
At night I sat and wailed in sorrow. I wished to die but could not; to live, yet found nothing worth living for. O Heaven above, what sin have I committed to meet such calamity!

边荒与华异，人俗少义理。处所多霜雪，胡风春夏起。
边远之地与中原不同，民俗少有仁义礼理。气候严寒多霜雪，胡风春夏仍狂起。
The frontier was unlike the civilized lands; its people lacked justice and propriety. The place was cold and full of frost and snow, and the barbarian winds rose even in spring and summer.

翩翩吹我衣，肃肃入我耳。
狂风翩翩吹我衣裳，萧萧之声肃肃入耳。
The gusts fluttered my garments and whistled sharply into my ears.

感时念父母，哀叹无穷已。
感伤时事思念父母，悲叹之情无穷无尽。
Moved by the times, I thought of my parents and sighed endlessly in grief.

有客从外来，闻之常欢喜。
有外乡客人来，听闻便欣喜。
When a traveler came from afar, I would always be filled with joy to hear the news.

迎问其消息，辄复非乡里。
上前迎问消息，却总不是故乡之事。
I eagerly asked for tidings, yet they were never of my homeland.

邂逅徼时愿，骨肉来迎己。
偶然得遂平生愿，亲人来迎接我。
By chance my long-held wish was fulfilled—my kin had come to take me home.

已得自解免，当复弃儿子。
虽得以脱身归国，却要抛下亲生儿子。
Though freed from captivity, I had to abandon my own children.

天属缀人心，念别无会期。
天性血缘连人心，想到永别不再相见。
Blood ties bind the human heart; to think of parting forever brought unbearable pain.

存亡永乖隔，不忍与之辞。
生死永隔，不忍道别。
Alive or dead, we would be separated forever—I could not bear to say farewell.

儿前抱我颈，问母欲何之。
儿子抱着我脖颈，问母亲要去何方。
My sons clung to my neck and asked, “Mother, where are you going?”

人言母当去，岂复有还时？
人家说母亲一去，就不会再回来了吗？
They said, “They told us, mother, that once you leave, you will not return— is it true?”

阿母常仁恻，今何更不慈？
母亲平日仁慈，今日为何如此不慈？
You have always been kind and gentle, mother; why are you so cruel today?

我尚未成人，奈何不顾思！
我尚未成人，你怎能不顾念我？
I have not yet grown up—how can you leave me without care?

见此崩五内，恍惚生狂痴。
见此情景，五内崩裂，恍惚如狂如痴。
At this sight my heart burst apart; I was delirious, as if mad or lost.

号泣手抚摩，当发复回疑。
哭泣着抚摸儿子，临发又复迟疑。
I wept, stroking my sons, hesitating again when it was time to depart.

兼有同时辈，相送告离别。
并有同被掳之辈前来送别。
My companions in captivity came to bid me farewell.

慕我独得归，
他们羡我得归，
They envied me for returning, 

哀叫声摧裂。马为立踟蹰，车为不转辙。
哀哭之声撕裂人心，马儿停步徘徊，车轮也不再转动。
Their cries broke my heart; even the horses hesitated to move, and the wheels of the carriage stopped turning.

观者皆歔欷，行路亦呜咽。
围观的人无不抽泣，行路的人也为之呜咽。
Those who watched wept, and the passers-by sobbed as well.

去去割情恋，踹征日遐迈。
一路行去，割断亲情，行程一天天遥远。
I moved on, cutting the bonds of love, while each day’s journey carried me farther away.

悠悠三千里，何时复交会。
路途漫漫三千里，何时才能再相会？
The journey stretched three thousand li; when would we ever meet again?

念我出腹子，匈臆为摧败。
思念我亲生的儿子，胸中郁结悲痛欲绝。
Thinking of my own sons tore my chest apart with pain.

既至家人尽，又复无中外。
回到家中，亲人皆亡，连族亲也无一幸存。
When I arrived home, all my family were gone—no relatives remained.

城郭为山林，庭宇生荆艾。
昔日城郭已成山林，庭院中长满荆棘艾草。
The city had become a wilderness, and the courtyards were overgrown with weeds and thorns.

白骨不知谁，从横莫覆盖。
白骨纵横，不知是谁的遗骸，无人掩埋。
White bones lay scattered about, no one knew to whom they belonged, and none had been buried.

出门无人声，豺狼号且吠。
出门听不到人声，只有豺狼的嚎叫与犬吠。
Outside, there were no human voices—only the cries of wolves and barking of wild dogs.

茕茕对孤景，怛咤糜肝肺。
孤独地面对寂寞的影子，悲伤得五脏俱裂。
Alone, I faced my shadow; grief gnawed at my heart and lungs.

登高远眺望，魂神忽飞逝。
登高远望，魂魄似要飞散。
Climbing high to gaze afar, my soul seemed to drift away.

奄若寿命尽，旁人相宽大。
仿佛寿命将尽，旁人纷纷宽慰。
I felt as though my life was ending, and others tried to comfort me.

为复强视息，虽生何聊赖！
我勉强抬头呼吸，纵然生存又有何意义！
I forced myself to breathe and look up, yet though alive, what joy could life bring?

托命于新人，竭心自勖厉。
将生命托付于新夫，竭力自勉振作。
I entrusted my life to my new husband and exhorted myself to be strong.

流离成鄙贱，常恐复捐废。
流离失所成卑贱之人，常恐再被遗弃。
I had become lowly from exile, always afraid of being abandoned again.

人生几何时？怀忧终年岁！
人生能有几何？忧愁却伴我终生！
How short is life, yet sorrow endures for all my years!

嗟薄祜兮遭世患，宗族殄兮门户单。
感叹自己薄福遭遇世难，宗族灭绝门户微弱。
I resented that I had no luck and that I had experienced such miserable times. My family and clan were destroyed and only a few members had survived.

身执略兮入西关，历险阻兮之羌蛮。
身被掳掠向西入函谷关，经历险阻到达羌蛮之地。
I was robbed and taken westward to cross Hangu Pass. I experienced hardship and danger and finally reached the barbarian regions.

山谷眇兮路曼曼，眷东顾兮但悲叹。
山谷辽远长路漫漫，依恋东望只生悲叹。
Mountains and valleys were far and long, and the road was endless. I missed my hometown and looked eastward, but I could only sigh sorrowfully.

冥当寝兮不能安，饥当食兮不能餐，常流涕兮眦不干。
夜晚该睡心不能安，饥饿该吃却吃不下，常常流涕眼眶不干。
When night-time came I could not sleep peacefully; when meal times arrived I could not eat. My eyes were always tearful and never dried.

薄志节兮念死难，虽苟活兮无形颜。
失去节操自杀真难，即使苟活已无颜面。
I lost my loyalty and virtue, but it was difficult to commit suicide. Even though I was still alive, I lived without dignity.

惟彼方兮远阳精，阴气凝兮雪夏零。
那个地方远离太阳，阴气凝结夏天下雪。
That place was far away from the Sun, and because the yin energy all congealed there, it snowed in summer.

沙漠壅兮尘冥冥，有草木兮春不荣。
沙漠壅塞沙尘迷茫，虽有草树春天不绿。
The desert was congested and the dust was hazy. Even though grasses and trees grew there, they did not turn green in spring.

人似禽兮食臭腥，言兜离兮状窈停。
人像野兽好吃臭腥，语言难懂形貌奇异。
The local people of that place were like animals who liked eating smelly food, their language was difficult to understand, and their appearance was strange and unusual.

岁聿暮兮时迈征，夜悠长兮禁门扃。
一年将尽时间真快，夜里悠长禁门锁闭。
Time went so fast and one year had gone by. The night was long, and I locked myself inside.

不能寐兮起屏营，登胡殿兮临广庭。
不能睡着起来彷徨，登上胡殿面对大庭。
I could not sleep, so I got up and wandered around anxiously. I climbed up to the barbarian’s hall and faced the main courtyard.

玄云合兮翳月星，北风厉兮肃泠泠。
黑云遮盖星月之光，北风寒冷肃肃泠泠。
Dark clouds completely covered the light of the stars, and the coldness of the northern wind chilled me in distress.

胡笳动兮边马鸣，孤雁归兮声嘤嘤。
胡笳声动边马嘶鸣，孤雁归去叫声嘤嘤。
The sound of the barbarian pipe was very touching, and the frontier horses neighed and whinnied. The lone wild goose returned home and its voice was like sobbing.

乐人兴兮弹琴筝，音相和兮悲且清。
乐师兴起弹琴弹筝，音声相和悲苦凄清。
Court musicians arose to play zithers, and the sound of the music was harmonious but sorrowful.

心吐思兮匈愤盈，欲舒气兮恐彼惊，含哀咽兮涕沾颈。
心抒思虑胸积郁闷，想舒口气怕他惊醒，含着哀咽眼泪沾颈。
My heart was full of worries and anxieties, sadness and distress. I wanted to heave a deep sigh and release my emotion but was afraid of frightening him, awakening him.

家既迎兮当归宁，临长路兮捐所生，儿呼母兮号。
家人来迎临当回家，面对长路抛弃儿呼母兮号。
When my family came to take me home, I had to face the travail of traveling long distances, leaving my sons behind. My sons were calling me with tears.

失声，我掩耳兮不忍听。
儿叫母亲痛哭失声，我掩耳朵不忍去听。
And screaming so that they lost their voices. I could not bear to hear them so I covered my ears.

追持我兮走茕茕，顿复起兮毁颜形。
追来拉我独走茕茕，顿地复起容貌哀毁。
They came after me and tried to catch up with me, but I had to leave without them. They crumpled to the ground, and rose again with sorrowful and miserable looks.

还顾之兮破人情，心怛绝兮死复生。
回头看他血缘断绝，心情伤绝死去又活来。
I turned my head to look at them again, and this time our bond was completely severed. I was full of despair and I hovered between death and life.
