黄昌字圣真，会稽余姚人也。
黄昌字圣真，会稽郡余姚县人。
Huang Chang, style named Shengzhen, was a native of Yuyao District in Kuaiji Commandery.

本出孤微，居近学官，数见诸生修庠序之礼，因好之，遂就经学，又晓习文法。
原本出于寒微之家，住的地方靠近县学校，经常见到学生们行学校之礼，因为对此很喜欢，于是接触经学，又通晓了法律条文。
He was originally from an impoverished family, but because he lived very close to a district school, he often saw students performing school rituals, and he liked it very much. As a result, he studied the classics and became familiar with the laws.

仕郡为决曹，刺史行部见昌，甚奇之，辟从事。
在郡中担任决曹，州刺史巡视所属各部见到黄昌，很赏识他，征召他为从事。
He served in the Judicial Section of the commandery. When the Regional Inspector went on an inspection trip and met Huang Chang, he admired him greatly and appointed him as Retainer.

后拜宛令，政尚严猛，好发奸伏。
后来担任宛县令，为政崇尚严厉凶猛，喜欢揭发奸邪隐恶。
Later, he served as District Magistrate of Wan, and he advocated strict and rigorous governance, liking to expose evil and hidden crimes.

人有盗其车盖者，昌初无所言，后乃密遣亲客至门下贼曹家，掩取得之。
有人偷了黄昌的车盖，黄昌起初根本不说什么，后来暗中派出亲信的人到偷他车盖的贼曹家里找到车盖。
When someone stole the canopy of his carriage, Huang Chang said nothing at first, but later secretly sent someone he trusted to the thief’s house, where he found it.

悉收其家，一时杀戮。
把贼曹一家全部抓捕，同时杀死。
He arrested the entire family and had them all executed at once.

大姓战惧，皆称神明。
地方豪族吓得战栗恐惧，都称他神明。
Powerful and prestigious local families trembled in fear and called him “the Wise and Bright.”

朝廷举能，迁蜀郡太守。
朝廷以才能推举他，升为蜀郡太守。
The court recommended him for his talent and promoted him to Governor of Shu Commandery.

先太守李根，年老多悖政，百姓侵冤。
前任太守李根年纪老了，为政多错乱，百姓受侵害、遭冤屈。
The previous governor, Li Gen, was old and often misgoverned, causing the people to suffer encroachment and injustice.


及昌到，吏人讼者七百余人，悉为断理，莫不得所。
诉讼的有七百多人，黄昌全都判断处理，大家都很满意。
When Huang Chang assumed office, there were more than seven hundred people, including officers and local folks, who came to appeal their cases. Huang Chang dealt with all of them, making fair judgments and laying down fair sentences. Everyone was very satisfied.

密捕盗帅一人，胁使条诸县强暴之人姓名居处，乃分遣掩讨，无有遗脱。
他暗中抓捕了一个盗匪首领，逼他列出各县危害百姓的人的姓名和住处，于是分路派兵抓捕讨伐，没有一个逃掉的。
In secret, he arrested a leader of thieves and forced him to provide a list of other robbers with their names and addresses—these robbers lived in various districts and encroached upon people's lives greatly. Huang Chang then dispatched his troops along various separate routes to catch the petty robbers, and none of them escaped.

宿恶大奸，皆奔走它境。
长期为害的恶徒及大奸之人，都逃亡到其他郡里。
However, the evil, more hardened bandits escaped to other commanderies.

初，昌为州书佐，其妇归宁于家，遇贼被获，遂流转入蜀，为人妻。
先前，黄昌担任州书佐，他的妻子回娘家，路上遇到盗贼被抢走，因此辗转流浪到蜀地，做了别人的妻子。
Sometime earlier, when Huang Chang served as Administrative Clerk of the commandery, there came a day when his wife was traveling back to her parents' home. She was kidnapped by bandits along the way. She escaped, traveling to several locales before she finally arrived in Shu, where she married someone else.

其子犯事，乃诣昌自讼。
她的儿子犯了罪，她就到黄昌那里投案责备自己。
When her son committed a crime, she went to Huang Chang's office and turned herself in. She requested a punishment on behalf of her son.

昌疑母不类蜀人，因问所由。
黄昌疑心罪犯的母亲不像是蜀人，就问她是哪里人。
Huang Chang suspected that the criminal's mother did not look like a local native, so he asked her where she was from.

对曰：“妾本会稽余姚戴次公女，州书佐黄昌妻也。妾尝归家，为贼所略，遂至于此。”
她回答说：“我本是会稽郡余姚县戴次公的女儿，州书佐黄昌的妻子。我曾由于回娘家而被强盗抢去，于是就到了这里。”
She answered, "I am a native of Yuyao District in Kuaiji Commandery, and my father is the second son of Dai's. Administrative Clerk Huang Chang was my husband. I was kidnapped by robbers on my way back to my parents' house, so I ended up here."

昌惊呼前谓曰：“何以识黄昌邪?”
黄昌听了大惊，叫她上前来对她说：“以什么辨认黄昌呢?”
Huang Chang was very shocked and asked her to come forward and said to her, "In what way can you recognize Huang Chang?"

对曰：“昌左足心有黑子，常自言当为二千石。”
她回答说：“黄昌左脚心有颗黑痣，他经常自称将来会官至二千石。”
She answered, "There is a dark mole under Huang Chang's left foot. He had often said that in the future he would be an official with two thousand bushels."

昌乃出足示之，因相持悲泣，还为夫妇。
黄昌于是伸出脚来给她看。两人于是相互执手拥抱悲泣，仍旧成为夫妻。
Thus, Huang Chang showed her his bare foot. The two of them held hands and embraced one another tearfully. Later, they were reunited as a married couple once more.


视事四年，征，再迁陈相。
在任四年，被征召，升迁了两次担任陈国相。
After serving in the position for four more years, Huang Chang was summoned and promoted twice to the post of Counselor-delegate of Chen State.

县人彭氏，旧豪纵，造起大舍、高楼临道。
下属县人彭氏，一直是地方豪族，建造大房子，高楼临近道路。
One of his subordinates was a local Mr. Peng from a prestigious and powerful family. Mr. Peng had built a towering mansion close to the main street.

昌每出行县，彭氏妇人辄升楼而观。
黄昌每次出去巡视属县，彭氏妇人就登楼来看他。
Every time Huang Chang went to inspect the surrounding districts, women of the Peng family would go upstairs to spy on him.

昌不喜，遂敕收付狱案杀之。
黄昌很不高兴，就下令把她们抓起来关进监狱，并治了罪杀了她们。
Huang Chang was not happy about that, so he ordered them arrested and imprisoned. As punishment, he ordered the death penalty.

又迁为河内太守，又再迁颍川太守。
又升迁任河内太守，再次升任颍川太守。
He was later appointed Governor of Henei, and then again, Governor of Yingchuan.

永和五年，征拜将作大匠。
永和五年（公元140年），被征召授予将作大匠之职。
In the fifth year of the Yonghe era (140), he was summoned and granted the position Director of Palace Buildings.

汉安元年，进补大司农，左转太中大夫，卒于官。
汉安元年（公元142年），入朝担任大司农，贬为太中大夫，死于任上。
In the first year of the Han’an era (142), he went back to court to be Chamberlain for National Treasury, but was later demoted to the position of Superior Grand Master of the Palace. He died during his tenure in that position.
