安定皇甫规妻者，不知何氏女也。规初丧室家，后更娶之。
安定郡人皇甫规的妻子，不知道是姓什么人家的女儿。皇甫规起先时妻子去世，后来又娶了她。
Huangfu Gui of Anding Commandery was married, but his wife's name was unknown. He married her after his first wife died.

妻善属文，能草书，时为规答书记，众人怪其工。
妻子善于写作，会写草书，时常替皇甫规回复报上来的文件，大家都奇怪皇甫规文辞书法写得工丽。
She was good at composing literary pieces and writing cursive calligraphy. She often acted as Huangfu Gui’s ghost writer, replying to official documents. Everyone was amazed at the refinement of the writing.

及规卒时，妻年犹盛而容色美。
等到皇甫规死的时候，他的妻子年纪还不大，而且容貌漂亮。
When Huangfu Gui died, his wife was still young and beautiful.

后董卓为相国，承其名，娉以拼辎百乘，马二十匹，奴婢钱帛充路。
后来董卓担任相国，久仰其才貌双全的名声，用拼辎车一百辆、二十匹马、奴婢钱帛充塞道路来聘娶她。
Later, when Dong Zhuo became Chancellor, he had long heard of her reputation for beauty and talent, and sent betrothal gifts of one hundred covered carriages, twenty horses, and numerous servants, money, and silk—the road was filled with offerings.

妻乃轻服诣卓门，跪自陈请，辞甚酸怆。
皇甫规妻于是穿着便服到董卓家，跪着表达自己不愿意再嫁的请求，话说得酸楚凄凉。
Huangfu Gui’s wife, wearing simple clothes, went to Dong Zhuo’s residence, knelt, and expressed her unwillingness to remarry, speaking in a tone of deep sorrow and grief.

卓使傅奴侍者悉拔刀围之，而谓曰：“孤之威教，欲令四海风靡，何有不行于一妇人乎?”
董卓让家奴侍者都拔刀包围她，对她说：“我的威风命令，几乎使全天下都服从我了，难道会在区区一个女人身上行不通吗?”
Dong Zhuo ordered his attendants to surround her with drawn knives and said, “My power and command make all under heaven submit. Could they possibly fail against one mere woman?”

妻知不免，乃立骂卓曰：“君羌胡之种，毒害天下，犹未足邪?”
皇甫规妻知道不能逃过此劫，于是站起来骂董卓说：“你这个羌胡的虐种，毒害天下，，还不够吗？”
Knowing she could not escape, Huangfu Gui’s wife stood up and cursed Dong Zhuo, saying, “You, a barbarian spawn of the Qiang, bring calamity upon the empire, yet still have you not done enough harm to the world?  ”


妾之先人，清德奕世。皇甫氏文武上才，为汉忠臣，君亲非其趣使走吏乎?敢欲行非礼于尔君夫人邪!
我的先人，世代有清白道德。我丈夫文武高才，是汉朝的忠臣。你以前不就是受他指挥的一个小吏吗？难道想要非礼你主人的夫人吗！
For generations, my ancestors have maintained their integrity. My husband, of the Huangfu clan, was a man of both literary and martial talent—a loyal minister of the Han. Were you not once his subordinate? How dare you attempt to violate your lord’s wife!

卓乃引车庭中，以其头县轭，鞭扑交下。
董卓于是把车拉到庭院中，把她的头挂在车轭上，棍鞭齐下。
Dong Zhuo then pulled the carriage into the courtyard, hung her head over the yoke, and ordered the servants to lash her with whips and rods.

妻谓持杖者曰：“何不重乎?速尽为惠。”遂死车下。
皇甫规妻对拿棍杖的人说：“难道不能打重点吗？让我快点死就算是你们给我的恩德。”就这样被打死于车下。
She said to the one holding the rod, “Can’t you strike harder? To end my life quickly would be your mercy.” She thus died beneath the carriage.

后人图画，号曰“礼宗”。
后人给她画像，称她为“礼宗”。
Later generations painted her portrait and honored her with the title “Ancestor of Propriety.”