单超，河南人；徐璜，下邳良城人；具瑗，魏郡元城人；左馆，河南平阴人；唐衡，颍川郾人也。
单超，河南人；徐璜，下邳良城人；具瑗，魏郡元城人；左馆、唐衡颍川郾人。
Shan Chao was from Henan. Xu Heng was from Liangcheng in Xiapi. Ju Yuan was from Yuancheng in Wei Commandery. Zuo Wan was from Pingyin in Henan, and Tang Heng was from Yan in Yingchuan.

桓帝初，超、璜、瑗为中常侍，馆、衡为小黄门史。
桓帝初年，单超、徐璜、具瑗担任中常侍，左馆、唐衡担任小黄门史。
In the beginning of Emperor Huan's reign, Shan Chao, Xu Heng, and Ju Yuan all served as Palace Attendants-in-ordinary, while Zuo Wan and Tang Heng served as Scribes of Junior Attendant of Eunuchs.

初，梁冀两妹为顺、桓二帝皇后，冀代父商为大将军，再世权戚，威振天下。
早先时候，梁冀的两个妹妹是顺帝、桓帝的皇后，梁冀接替父亲梁商担任大将军，父子两代都是掌权的外戚，威震天下。
Earlier, Liang Ji's two younger sisters were the empresses of Emperor Shun and Emperor Huan, respectively. Liang Ji succeeded his father Liang Shang as Grand General, and both father and son held political power for two generations. Their power and influence were well-known throughout the country.

冀自诛太尉李固、杜乔等，骄横益甚。
梁冀自从杀了太尉李固、杜乔等人后，更加骄横。
Liang Ji became even more arrogant and unreasonable after he killed Defenders-in-chief Li Gu, Du Qiao, and others.

皇后乘势忌恣，多所鸩毒，上下钳口，莫有言者。
皇后也凭借权势气焰嚣张，多有被她所害的人，朝廷上下都闭口，没有敢谏诤的人。
The empress also took advantage of imperial power and prestige, and became so puffed up with pride that she harmed many people. Officials of both higher and lower ranks kept silent, and none dared offer admonition or reprimand.

帝逼畏久，恒怀不平，恐言泄，不敢谋之。
皇帝权威受到长期压制，心里常怀不满，怕说出来会泄露，不敢谋划对付他们。
Feeling that his authority had long been suppressed, the emperor held a grudge against the Liang family, but he was afraid that speaking out would be exposed and did not dare to plan against them.

延熹二年，皇后崩，帝因如厕，独呼衡问：“左右与外舍不相得者皆谁乎?”
延熹二年(公元159年)，皇后去世后，皇帝有一次上厕所，私下叫唐衡过来问：“哪些宦官与皇后娘家关系不好？”
In the second year of the Yanxi era (159), after the empress died, the emperor, while visiting the privy, privately called Tang Heng and asked, "Which eunuchs do not get along with the empress's relatives?"

衡对曰：“单超、左馆，前诣河南尹不疑，礼敬小简，不疑收其兄弟送洛阳狱，二人诣门谢，乃得解。徐璜、具瑗常私忿疾外舍放横，口不敢道。”
唐衡回答说：“单超、左馆曾去拜访河南尹梁不疑，因礼貌稍有不周，梁不疑把他们的兄弟抓进洛阳狱，后来两人上门谢罪，事情才解决。徐璜、具瑗则私下里对皇后娘家的恣横放肆很愤恨，但嘴上不敢说。”
Tang Heng replied, "Shan Chao and Zuo Wan previously visited Governor of Henan Liang Buyi and failed to show sufficient deference, so Liang Buyi arrested their brothers and sent them to the Luoyang prison; the matter was only resolved after the two came to his gate to apologize. Xu Heng and Ju Yuan privately resented the empress's relatives for their arrogance, but dared not speak out."

于是帝呼超、馆入室，谓曰：“梁将军兄弟专固国朝，迫胁外内，公卿以下，从其风旨。今欲诛之，于常侍意何如?”
于是皇帝把单超和左馆叫进内室，说道：“梁将军及其兄弟牢牢把持朝廷，逼迫内外官员，从公卿到下官都随他们的旨意行事。如今我想诛杀他们，你们常侍意下如何？”
The emperor then summoned Shan Chao and Zuo Wan into his chamber and said, "General Liang and his brothers have firmly gripped the court, coercing officials inside and outside; ministers and lower officers follow their will. I now wish to execute them—what do you, the Attendants-in-ordinary, think?"

超等对曰：“诚国奸贼，当诛日久。臣等弱劣，未知圣意何如耳?”
单超等人回答说：“他们确是国家的奸贼，早就该诛除。我们势力微弱，不知道陛下的真实旨意如何。”
Shan Chao and the others replied, "They are indeed traitors and villains who should have been executed long ago. We are weak and inferior and do not know Your Majesty's true intent."

帝曰：“审然者，常侍密图之。”
皇帝说：“既然如此，你们常侍就秘密谋划此事吧。”
The emperor said, "If that is so, you Attendants must secretly plot against them."

对曰：“图之不难，但恐陛下复中狐疑。”
常侍回答：“筹划本身并不难，只怕陛下中途又生狐疑犹豫。”
They answered, "Planning it is not difficult, but we fear Your Majesty may again fall into hesitation."

帝曰：“奸臣胁国，当伏其罪，何疑乎?”
皇帝说：“奸臣威胁国家，理应伏法，有何可疑？”
The emperor said, "A treacherous minister threatens the state and should be punished—what reason for doubt?"

于是更召璜、瑗等五人，遂定其议。
于是他又召来徐璜、具瑗等共五人，大家遂定下了计划。
He then summoned Xu Heng, Ju Yuan, and three others—five in all—and they finalized the plan.

帝啮超臂出血为盟。
皇帝咬单超的手臂至出血以为盟誓。
The emperor bit Shan Chao's arm until it bled as a pledge of their oath.

于是诏收冀及宗亲党与，悉诛之。
于是下诏逮捕梁冀及其宗亲党党，全部处死。
They then issued an edict to arrest Liang Ji and his relatives and associates, and all were executed.

馆、衡迁中常侍。
左馆、唐衡被任命为中常侍。
Both  Zuo  Wan and Tang Heng was appointed Palace Attendant-in-ordinary.

封超，新丰侯，二万户，璜，武原侯，瑗，东武阳侯，各万五千户，赐钱各千五百万；馆，上蔡侯，衡，汝阳侯，各万三千户，赐钱各千三百万。
单超被封为新丰侯，食邑二万户；徐璜为武原侯，具瑗为东武阳侯，各食邑一万五千户，赐钱各一千五百万；左馆为上蔡侯，唐衡为汝阳侯，各食邑一万三千户，赐钱各一千三百万。
Shan Chao was named Marquis of Xinfeng with a fiefdom of twenty thousand households. Xu Heng was named Marquis of Wuyuan, and Ju Yuan, Marquis of Dongwuyang, each with fifteen thousand households and fifteen million in coin. Zuo Wan was named Marquis of Shangcai, and Tang Heng, Marquis of Ruyang, each with thirteen thousand households and thirteen million in coin.

五人同日封，故世谓之“五侯”。又封小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人为乡侯。
五人同一天受封，因此世人称他们为“五侯”。另外，小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人被封为乡侯。
All five were enfeoffed on the same day, so they were collectively called the “Five Marquises”. In addition, eight Junior Attendants of Eunuchs, including Liu Pu and Zhao Zhong, were made Township Marquises.

自是权归宦官，朝廷日乱矣!
自此之后，权力归于宦官，朝廷日益混乱。
Since then, imperial power fell into the hands of eunuchs, and the court became increasingly chaotic.

超病，帝遣使者就拜车骑将军。
单超生病，皇帝派遣使者到他家任命他为车骑将军。
Shan Chao fell ill, so the emperor sent an envoy to appoint him General of Chariot and Horse.

明年薨，赐东园秘器、棺中玉具，赠侯、将军印绶，使者理丧。
次年去世，皇帝赏赐东园制作的棺材和玉具，并赠予侯和将军的印绶，派遣使者主持丧礼。
The following year he died. The emperor awarded him burial objects and jade for his coffin produced in the Imperial Eastern Garden, and granted him the official seals for his marquis and general titles, with an envoy supervising the funeral.

及葬，发五营骑士、将军、侍御史护丧，将作大匠起冢茔。
下葬时，调动五营骑士、将军及侍御史护送灵柩，并由将作大匠修建坟墓。
On the day of his burial, five troops of cavalry, generals, and an Attendant Censor were dispatched to guard the funeral, and the Chamberlain for Palace Buildings built his tomb.

其后四侯转横，天下为之语曰：“左回天，具独坐，徐卧虎，唐两憧。”
此后其余四侯更加横行霸道，民间有句俗语：“左权能左右天子，具独坐尊贵，徐如卧虎，唐东倒西歪。”
Thereafter, the remaining four marquises became increasingly arrogant, and the people coined a saying: "Zuo Wan's power sways the emperor, Ju Yuan is supremely wealthy, Xu Heng is like a crouching tiger, and Tang Heng is a flip-flopper."

皆竞起弟宅，楼观壮丽，穷极伎巧。
他们纷纷建造府第和楼观，装饰宏丽，尽显巧技。
All competed in building mansions and towers, magnificent in design and pushing the limits of craftsmanship.

金银熨毛，
金银铺设，毛毡奢华。
Gold, silver, and fur carpets were everywhere.


施于犬马。
连犬马身上都用到了。
They even lavished these things on their dogs and horses.

多取良人美女，以为姬妾，皆珍饰华侈，拟则宫人。
他们广纳良家女子和美人为姬妾，服饰华贵，按宫中规格装饰。
They took many respectable women and beauties as concubines, adorning them lavishly as if they were palace ladies.

其仆从皆乘牛车而从列骑。
他们的仆从都乘牛车出行，后面跟随列骑。
Their servants rode ox-carts attended by ranks of cavalry.

又养其疏属，或乞嗣异姓，或买苍头为子，并以传国袭封。
又供养疏远的宗属，有的向外姓乞求嗣子，有的买奴为子，以此承袭封号。
They also supported distant kin, petitioned other families for heirs, or bought servants as sons to continue their fiefs.

兄弟姻戚，皆宰州临郡，辜较百姓，与盗贼无异。
他们的兄弟姻戚多为州郡长官，横征暴敛，对百姓如同盗贼。
Their brothers and in‑laws held provincial posts, extorted the people, and differed little from bandits.

超弟安为河东太守，弟子匡为济阴太守，璜弟盛为河内太守，馆弟敏为陈留太守，瑗兄恭为沛相，皆为所在蠹害。
单超的弟弟单安为河东太守，弟子单匡为济阴太守，徐璜的弟弟徐盛为河内太守，左馆的弟弟左敏为陈留太守，具瑗的兄长具恭为沛国相，皆为地方蠹害。
Shan Chao’s brother Shan An was Governor of Hedong, Shan Kuang his kinsman was Governor of Jiyin, Xu Heng’s brother Xu Sheng was Governor of Henei, Zuo Wan’s brother Zuo Min was Governor of Chenliu, and Ju Yuan’s elder brother Ju Gong was Counselor‑delegate of Pei; all became local scourges.

璜兄子宣为下邳令，暴虐尤甚。
徐璜的侄子徐宣任下邳令，对百姓尤为暴虐。
Xu Xuan, Xu Heng’s nephew and magistrate of Xiapi, was especially brutal.

先是求故汝南太守下邳李嵩女，不能得。
此前他曾求娶故汝南太守李嵩之女，却没有如愿。
Earlier he sought to marry the daughter of Li Song, former Governor of Runan, but failed.

及到县，遂将吏卒至嵩家，载其女归，戏射杀之，埋著寺内。
等到任上，他便差吏卒到李嵩家，把其女载回，在戏射中将她射杀，葬于衙署内。
When he took office he sent officers to Li Song’s house, carried the daughter back, killed her in a “target‑shooting” game, and buried her within the office grounds.

时下邳县属东海，汝南黄浮为东海相，有告言宣者，浮乃收宣家属，无少长悉考之。
当时下邳属东海国，汝南人黄浮任东海相，有人告发徐宣，黄浮遂拘捕徐宣家属，不问老幼一并审问。
At that time Xiapi belonged to Donghai State and Huang Fu of Runan was its governor; when someone reported Xu Xuan, Huang Fu arrested Xu Xuan’s household and examined everyone, young and old.


掾史以下固谏争，浮曰：“徐宣国贼，今日杀之，明日坐死，足以瞑目矣!”
直劝谏他。黄浮说：“徐宣是危害国家的人，今天杀了他，明天我因此而死，也足以死而瞑目了。”
Officials of lower rank strongly advised against it, but Huang Fu said, "Xu Xuan is a traitor to the state. If I die tomorrow for killing him today, I can die with peace of mind."

即案宣罪弃市，暴其尸以示百姓，郡中震栗。
即刻把徐宣治罪杀于闹市，把他的尸体暴露在外面用以示众，郡中人为此震惊战栗。
He immediately judged Xu Xuan guilty, executed him in the market, and exposed his corpse to the public; the people of the commandery were shocked and terrified.

璜于是诉怨于帝，帝大怒，浮坐髡钳，输作右校。
徐璜因此向皇帝诉怨，皇帝大怒，黄浮因此被髡刑锁颈，押送将作大匠属下的右校去服役。
Xu Heng then complained to the emperor, who became very angry; Huang Fu was punished with a shaved head, his neck locked in restraints, and sent to serve under the Right Construction Foreman.

五侯宗族宾客虐遍天下，民不堪命，起为寇贼。
五个侯的宗族宾客肆虐遍于天下，百姓无法忍受，纷纷去做寇贼。
The clans and associates of the Five Marquises plundered the entire country, and the people, unable to endure it, rose as bandits.

七年，衡卒，亦赠车骑将军，如超故事。
七年(公元164年),唐衡去世，也赠车骑将军，像单超那时的待遇一样。
In the seventh year (164), Tang Heng died; he was also awarded the title General of Chariot and Horse, just as Shan Chao had been.

璜卒，赙赠钱布，赐冢茔地。
徐璜去世，朝廷赠送钱、布助丧，赏赐建造坟墓的土地。
When Xu Heng died, the emperor granted money and cloth to his family for the funeral and provided land for his tomb.


明年，司隶校尉韩演奏馆罪恶，及其兄太仆南乡侯称请托州郡，聚敛为奸，宾客放纵，侵犯吏民，馆、称皆自杀。
第二年，司隶校尉韩演于是上奏弹劾左馆的罪恶，以及他哥哥太仆、南乡侯左称跟州郡官员权钱交易，聚敛财产为非作歹，宾客放纵，侵犯官吏百姓。左馆、左称都自杀了。
A year later, Metropolitan Commandant Han Yan submitted a memorial reporting Zuo Wan's crime. He also reported on the corruption of Zuo Wan's elder brother Zuo Cheng, Chamberlain for Imperial Stud and Marquis of Southern Township. Zuo Wan and Zuo Cheng had engaged in corruption—trading money and power with officials in the regions and the commanderies. The brothers amassed wealth by taxing the people heavily and committing numerous other evils. They indulged their followers and associates in assaulting citizens and local officials. As a result of the report, Zuo Wan and Zuo Cheng committed suicide.

演又奏瑗兄沛相恭臧罪，征诣廷尉。瑗诣狱谢，上还东武侯印绶，诏贬为都乡侯，卒于家。
韩演又上书弹劾具瑗的哥哥沛国相具恭贪污罪，朝廷征具恭到廷尉问罪。具瑗到狱谢罪，交还东武侯的印绶，下诏贬他为都乡侯，死在家里。
Han Yan then impeached Ju Yuan's elder brother Ju Gong, Counselor-delegate of Pei State, who had committed the crime of corruption. The court requested that Ju Gong turn himself in to Chamberlain for Law Enforcement. Ju Yuan went to the prison for apology, and to turn in the seal that designated him Marquis of Dongwu. The emperor issued an edict demoting him to Chief Township Marquis. He died at home.

超及璜、衡袭封者，并降为乡侯，租入岁皆三百万，子弟分封者，悉夺爵土。
继承单超以及徐璜、唐衡爵位的，都降级为乡侯，租税所入每岁都减为三百万，家属受分封的，全部剥夺爵位封地。
The people who succeeded the titles of Marquis of Shan Chao, Xu Heng, and Tang Heng were all demoted to those of Township Marquis. Their income, gathered from tax collection, was reduced to three million. Family members who had been awarded with fiefdoms and titles also had their shares confiscated.

刘普等贬为关内侯。
刘普等人被贬为关内侯。
Liu Pu and others were demoted to the rank of Guannei Marquis.
