阳球字方正，渔阳泉州人也，家世大姓冠盖。
阳球字方正，渔阳郡泉州县人。阳家世代为官僚豪族。
Yang Qiu, style named Fangzheng, was a native of Quanzhou District in Yuyang Commandery. He came from a family of prestigious bureaucrats.

球能击剑，习弓马。
阳球擅长击剑，熟练骑马射箭。
He was good at swordsmanship and skillful in horsemanship and archery.

性严厉，好申韩之学。
性情严厉，喜欢申不害、韩非子之学。
He was strict by nature and enjoyed studying the schools of Shen Buhai and Han Feizi.

郡吏有辱其母者，球结少年数十人，杀吏，灭其家，由是知名。
郡中有位官吏侮辱了他的母亲，阳球纠集几十个年轻人，杀了这个官吏，灭了他全家，阳球因为这件事出了名。
Once, an officer humiliated his mother. In response, Yang Qiu gathered several dozen young people to kill this officer and his entire family. This incident made him famous.

初举孝廉，补尚书侍郎，闲达故事，其章奏处议，常为台阁所崇信。
起初，他被举荐为孝廉，任尚书侍郎，熟悉通晓旧的典章制度，他写的奏章和判决意见，经常被尚书长官推崇信赖。
In his earlier years, he was recommended as a Filial and Incorrupt candidate and appointed to be Attendant Gentleman of the Imperial Secretariat. He had great knowledge of regulations and the old laws. The reports and memorials he wrote, and the judgments and opinions he voiced, were admired and trusted by the Imperial Secretariat and his superior officers.

出为高唐令，以严苛过理，郡守收举。会赦见原。
后来离京担任高唐县令，因他为政太过于严苛，被郡太守抓起来并弹劾他，这时刚好国家大赦就被免罪了。
He later left the capital to serve as District Magistrate of Gaotang. Because his style of governing was strict and unkind, he was arrested and removed from his office by the Governor of the commandery. At this time, a national amnesty was announced, so he was pardoned.

辟司徒刘宠府，举高第。
被征召进入司徒刘宠府任职，以成绩优异被举荐。
He was then recruited to serve under Minister of Education Liu Chong and recommended and promoted because of his outstanding accomplishments.

九江山贼起，连月不解。三府上球有理奸才。
九江山中贼寇作乱，连续几个月不能平息。太尉、司徒、司空三府向皇帝推举阳球有治奸之才。
There was an insurgency at Jiujiang Mountain, and for several months, the government was unable to suppress it. The Three Dukes—the Defender-in-chief, the Minister of Education, and the Minister of Works—recommended Yang Qiu to the emperor, saying that he was capable of bringing the conspirators to justice.


拜九江太守。球到，设方略，凶贼殄破。收郡中奸吏尽杀之。
理奸恶的才能，朝廷任命他为九江太守，阳球到任，制定策略，将凶恶的贼寇消灭，逮捕了郡内的奸恶官吏并全部处死。
The emperor appointed Yang Qiu to the governorship of Jiujiang. Upon assuming office, Yang Qiu employed strategies to eliminate the evil bandits and robbers completely. He also arrested and executed deceitful and treacherous officials.

迁平原相，出教曰：“相前莅高唐，志埽奸鄙，遂为贵郡所见枉举。
调任平原国相，发布命令说：“我以前担任高唐县令，立志扫除奸邪贪鄙之徒，于是被贵郡枉加弹劾。
He was transferred to the post of Counselor-delegate of Pingyuan. He issued an announcement, saying: “In the past, while serving as District Magistrate of Gaotang, I made up my mind to wipe out all treacherous, evil, greedy, and deceitful people. As a result, I was unfairly reproached and removed from my post by the commandery governor.

昔桓公释管仲射钩之雠，高祖赦季布逃亡之罪，虽以不德，敢忘前义。
以前齐桓公原谅管仲射中衣钩之仇，汉高祖赦免季布逃亡之罪。虽然我缺乏德行，怎么敢忘记历史道义。
In ancient times, Duke Huan of Qi forgave Guan Zhong for shooting the hook of his clothes, and Emperor Gao of Han pardoned Ji Bu for fleeing. Though I am lacking in virtue, how can I forget the moral lessons of the past?

况君臣分定，而可怀宿昔哉？
何况上下的名分已经确立，怎么可以记前仇呢？
Moreover, since the hierarchy between ruler and subject has long been set, how could I harbor old grudges?

今一蠲往愆，期诸来效。
现在将前事一笔勾销，以观后效。
Now, I will wipe away all past offenses, in hope of observing your future conduct.

若受教之后，而不改奸状者，不得复有所容矣！”
如果看了这个命令以后，却还不改奸邪之事的，就不再宽容了。”
If, after receiving this order, you still refuse to change your treacherous behavior, there will be no forgiveness anymore.”

郡中咸畏服焉。
郡内的人都畏惧服从。
The people of the commandery obeyed, full of fear.

时天下大旱，司空张颢条奏长吏苛酷贪污者，皆罢免之。
当时天下大旱，司空张颢上书列举对老百姓苛刻残酷和贪污的长官属吏，全部罢免了这些人。
During that time, the nation was suffering from a severe drought. Minister of Works Zhang Hao submitted a report listing officers who were harsh, cruel, or corrupt, and all of them were dismissed from their posts.

球坐严苦，征诣廷尉，当免官。
阳球因为为政严酷，被征召去廷尉府受审，按规定应当罢免职务。
Because Yang Qiu’s governance was strict and severe, he was summoned to the Chamberlain for Law Enforcement for interrogation and, according to the law, was to be dismissed from office.

灵帝以球九江时有功，拜议郎迁将作大匠，坐事论。
灵帝因为阳球在九江任职时有成绩，任命他为议郎。后来他升为将作大匠，因事获罪。
However, Emperor Ling believed that Yang Qiu had made great contributions as Governor of Jiujiang, so he appointed him as Court Gentleman for Consultation. Later, he was promoted to Chamberlain for Palace Buildings but was convicted for an official misconduct.

顷之，拜尚书令。
不久，被授任尚书令。
Later, he was appointed Director of Imperial Secretariat.

奏罢鸿都文学曰：“伏承有诏敕中尚方为鸿都文学。
上书请求罢免鸿都文学说：“我看到诏书命中尚方为鸿都文学。
He submitted a memorial requesting the removal of the scholars of the Academy at the Gate of the Rainbow Terrace, saying: “I have read the imperial edict appointing officials from the Inner Workshop as scholars of the Hongdu Academy.”


鸿都文学乐松、江览等三十二人，图象立赞，以劝学者。臣闻《传》曰：君举必书，书而不法，后嗣何观？
江览等三十二人被画像作颂词，用以激励从事文化的人。我听说《左传》说：“国君一举一动必须记录。如果记录的不合法度，后来人如何受启示？”
He said, “I saw a decree in which Your Majesty ordered the Central Directorate for Imperial Manufacturies to draw pictures and write eulogies for Yue Song, Jiang Lan, and thirty-two other scholars of the Academy at the Gate of the Great Capital. Doing so, those who engage in literature and culture will receive acclaim and be encouraged. However, I have read Zuo’s Commentary on Spring and Autumn Annals, in which it says, ‘The sovereign’s every act and every move should be recorded. If what is recorded cannot serve as a fit model, then how can latecomers be inspired?’”

案松、览等，皆出于微蔑，斗算小人，依凭世戚，附托权豪，俛眉承睫，徼进明时。
考察乐松、江览等人，都出身低微贫贱，是没什么才能的小人，凭借累世的亲戚关系，依附权贵豪门，看他们的脸色行事，妄图为圣明的朝廷任用。
I have observed that Yue Song, Jiang Lan, and others are all from poor families of the lower class. They are petty men without talent. They rely on being related to generations of powerful families. They pledge their allegiance to these powerful and wealthy families, submitting to them completely. Reading the facial expressions of the powerful, they adjust their behaviors accordingly in a vain attempt to serve in this bright and prosperous era.

或献赋一篇，或鸟篆盈简，而位升郎中，形图丹青，亦有笔不点牍，辞不辩心，假手请字，妖伪百品，莫不被蒙殊恩，蝉蜕滓浊。
有的献上一篇赋，有的在竹简上写满鸟形篆字，因而官位升到郎中，形象绘于丹青之上。也有的字都不会写，辞不达意，请人代笔，妖妄虚假很多，无不受到超乎一般的恩遇，脱离卑微的地位。
While some of them present a piece of rhapsody, others write bird script on bamboo slips. These writings earn them positions as Gentlemen of the Interior, which make them eligible to have their portraits painted. Some of them cannot even write, or when they do write, cannot express what is in their minds. They hire people to write on their behalf. We see so many forged and deceitful pieces! Yet, they receive the highest honors—well beyond regular treatment—and are able thus, to rise from the mud.

是以有识掩口，天下嗟叹。
所以有见识的人都掩口而笑，天下人为之叹惜。
Consequently, wise and knowledgeable people criticize and laugh at them. Indeed, the entire world heaves a sigh for pity.

臣闻图象之设，以昭劝戒，欲令人君动鉴得失，未闻竖子小人诈作文颂，而可妄窃天官，垂象图素者也。
我听说画像的设立，是为了昭示激励告诫，想让皇帝随时借鉴得失，没听说过竖子小人伪作颂词而能够窃取朝廷官位，并为之画像的。
I have heard that the custom of portrait painting is used for encouragement or exhortation, and for the illustration of virtues. It may allow an emperor to draw lessons from previous failures or successes. It is unheard of, for a mean and petty fellow, a mere forger of eulogies, to grab a court position and have his portrait painted.

今太学、东观，足以宣明圣化。
现在太学、东观，足以宣扬圣明的教化。
Our National University and Eastern Palace Library are sufficient just as they are currently, to advocate sagely teachings.

愿罢鸿都之选，以消天下之谤。书奏不省。
以消除天下人的非议。奏章呈上去后皇帝不看。
"I hope that Your Majesty will cancel the election of the officials to the School at the Gate of the Great Capital. In so doing, you may eliminate the criticism of the entire world." Yang Qiu submitted his letter, but the emperor did not want to read it.

时中常侍王甫、曹节等奸虐弄权，扇动外内。球尝拊髀发愤曰：“若阳球作司隶，此曹子安得容乎?”光和二年，迁为司隶校尉。
当时中常侍王甫、曹节等人奸恶肆虐，玩弄权术，煽惑朝廷内外。阳球曾经拍着大腿发怒说：“如果我阳球做了司隶校尉，岂能放过这帮家伙？”光和二年(公元179年)，阳球升为司隶校尉。
At that time, Palace Attendants-in-ordinary Wang Fu and Cao Jie behaved in a willfully evil and dreadful manner. They liked to play political games and agitate people within and without the imperial court. Yang Qiu once banged his leg in anger and said, "If I, Yang Qiu, were to become Metropolitan Commandant, I would never let these people off!" In the second year of the Guanghe era (179), Yang Qiu was promoted to the post of Metropolitan Commandant.

王甫休沐里舍，球诣阙谢恩，奏收甫及中常侍淳于登、袁赦、封塌、中黄门刘毅、小黄门庞训、朱禹、齐盛等，及子弟为守令者，奸猾纵恣，罪合灭族。
王甫休假在家，阳球到宫中感谢皇恩，进奏逮捕王甫和中常侍淳于登、袁赦、封晶、中黄门刘毅、小黄门庞训、朱禹、齐盛等人，以及这帮人的子弟中担任太守县令的，奸恶狡猾恣意妄为，按照他们的罪应该灭族。
While Wang Fu took a day off, resting at home, Yang Qiu went to the palace to express his gratitude to the emperor. Yang Qiu submitted a request to arrest Wang Fu and other Palace Attendants-in-ordinary such as Chunyu Deng, Yuan She, and Feng Jing, as well as Palace Attendants of Middle Eunuchs Liu Yi, and Palace Attendants of Junior Eunuchs Pang Xun, Zhu Yu, and Qi Sheng. In addition, he asked to arrest those wicked and deceitful relatives of the group concerned who served as Governors or as District Magistrates, and who indulged themselves in criminal activities. Considering the crimes these people committed, they and their entire clan should have been executed.

太尉段颍，谄附佞幸，宜并诛戮。于是悉收甫、颊等送洛阳狱，及甫子永乐少府萌、沛相吉。
太尉段颊谄媚依附这些人，也应该跟他们一起处死。于是就把王甫、段颍等人都抓了押送到洛阳监狱，以及王甫的儿子永乐少府王萌、沛国相王吉。
Defender-in-chief Duan Jiong was attached to these people and fawned on them. Therefore he should also have been executed. Thus, Wang Fu, Duan Jiong, and the others were all arrested and imprisoned in Luoyang jail. Wang Fu’s sons, Chamberlain for Palace Revenues Wang Meng and Counselor-delegate of Pei State Wang Ji, were also imprisoned.

球自临考甫等。五毒备极。
阳球亲自到监狱拷问王甫等人，五种酷刑全部用上。
Yang Qiu personally went to the jail to interrogate Wang Fu and others. Each of the five severe punishments was used.

萌谓球曰：“父子既当伏诛，少以楚毒假借老父。”
王萌对阳球说：“我们父子既然应该判死刑，望您照顾我老父亲少用酷刑。”
Wang Meng said to Yang Qiu, “Even though my father, my brother, and I must receive the death sentence, I hope that you will be kind to my aged father by reducing his penalty to the least painful one.”

球曰：“若罪恶无状，即死不能赎。”
阳球说：“你们的罪恶大到无法形容，即使处死也不能抵消罪。”
Yang Qiu said, “Your guilt is too huge beyond description. Even a death penalty cannot offset your crime.”


死不灭责，乃欲求假借邪?
王萌于是骂他：“你以前像奴仆一样侍奉我父子，奴仆竟敢反叛你的主人吗?今日困吾，行自及也!”
Since death cannot extinguish their guilt, do you now seek to beg for clemency?

萌乃骂曰：“尔前奉事吾父子如奴，奴敢反汝主乎?今日困吾，行自及也!”
王萌于是骂他：“你以前像奴仆一样侍奉我父子，奴仆竟敢反叛你的主人吗?今天你折磨我们，将来你也会不得好报的!”
Wang Meng then cursed, “You used to serve my father and me like a slave; how could a slave dare rebel against his master? Today you oppress us, and the same fate will befall you!”

球使以土窒萌口，篓朴交至，父子悉死杖下。
阳球命人用泥土堵住王萌的嘴，棍棒俱下，王甫父子都死在杖下。
Yang Qiu ordered mud forced into Wang Meng’s mouth, then had them beaten with clubs until the father and son died beneath the blows.

颊亦自杀。
段颍也自杀了。
Duan Jiong also committed suicide.

乃僵磔甫尸于夏城门，大署榜曰：“贼臣王甫”。尽没入财产，妻子皆徙比景。
于是将王甫的尸体在夏城门割头示众，在门榜上用大字写上“贼臣王甫”。全部没收他们的财产，妻子儿女全被流放到比景。
They displayed Wang Fu’s decapitated corpse at Xiacheng Gate and posted a placard reading “Traitor Wang Fu.” All his property was confiscated and his family were exiled to Bijing.

球既诛甫，复欲以次表曹节等，乃敕中都官从事曰：“且先去大猾，当次案豪右。”权门闻之，莫不屏气。
阳球杀了王甫以后，又想按顺序上书处理曹节等人，就命中都官从事说：“暂且先除掉大奸大恶，接下来会按个处理世家大族。”权贵们知道这个话，无不胆战心惊。
After executing Wang Fu, Yang Qiu intended to submit charges against Cao Jie and the others in turn, and ordered the Central Metropolitan Officer, “First remove the great ruffians, then deal with the powerful families.” The nobles, hearing this, were struck silent with fear.

诸奢饰之物，皆各缄縢，不敢陈设。京师畏震。
把各种奢侈品都封存起来，不敢摆在外面。京师的人为之畏惧震动。
All luxurious items were sealed away and not displayed. The capital was seized with terror.

时顺帝虞贵人葬，百官会丧还，曹节见磔甫尸道次，慨然拉泪曰：“我曹自可相食，何宜使犬舐其汁乎?”语诸常侍，今且俱入，勿过里舍也。
这时，顺帝为虞贵人举行葬礼，百官参加葬礼回来，曹节见到王甫尸体被割头的地方，悲伤地擦着眼泪说：“我们这些人可以自相残杀，怎么可以让狗来舔他的肉汁呢?”又对各位常侍说，今天就一起直接进宫，不要经过自己的家。
When Emperor Shun held the funeral for Worthy Lady Yu, officials returned; Cao Jie saw Wang Fu’s displayed corpse along the road, wept and said, “We may slay one another, but should we let dogs lick his blood?” He told the other palace attendants to go straight to the palace together without passing by their homes.

节直入省白帝曰：“阳球故酷暴吏，前三府奏当免官，以责，竟然还想请求照顾乎?”
曹节直接进宫对皇帝说：“阳球本是个酷暴的吏，前三府曾奏请罢免他并究责，他竟然还想行使权力乎?”
Cao Jie went straight into the palace to report to the emperor, saying, “Yang Qiu is a cruel and violent official; the Three Departments previously petitioned for his dismissal and punishment—does he now presume to exercise power still?”


九江微功，复见擢用。
因为在九江立了点小功劳，又被提拔任用。
Because of his minor contribution while serving in Jiujiang, he was promoted.

愆过之人，好为妄作，不宜使在司隶，以骋毒虐。
阳球是个有过错、好胡作非为的人，不该让他当司隶校尉，以便他施展残酷暴虐。
Yang Qiu has made mistakes and likes to engage in unlawful acts. He should not be Metropolitan Commandant because the position gives him the opportunity to express his cruelty and commit abuses.

帝乃徙球为卫尉。
皇帝于是调任阳球为卫尉。
Thus, the emperor transferred Yang Qiu to the post of Chamberlain for Palace Garrison.

时球出谒陵，节敕尚书令召拜，不得稽留尺一。
当时阳球出外祭祀皇陵，曹节命尚书令召他回来上任，不得耽搁片刻。
At that time, Yang Qiu went out to worship at the imperial tombs. Cao Jie ordered Director of Imperial Secretariat to summon Yang Qiu back to accept his new post, commanding the messenger not to stop for even an instant.

球被召急，因求见帝，叩头曰：“臣无清高之行，横蒙鹰犬之任。”
阳球被急召，请求觐见皇帝，叩头说：“臣没有高洁的操守，却蒙陛下恩赐重任。”
Yang Qiu was thus summoned most urgently. He requested to see the emperor and kowtowed, saying, "I, your humble subject, do not possess lofty virtue; however, Your Majesty has bestowed his favor on me with this important duty."

“前虽纠诛王甫、段颊，盖简落狐狸，未足宣示天下。”
“先前虽诛王甫、段颊，不过是除了狐狸之辈，未足以示天下。”
"Although earlier on I exposed the crimes committed by Wang Fu and Duan Jiong and executed them, I merely eliminated devils as petty as foxes, and this is insufficient as a warning to the world."

“愿假臣一月，必令豺狼鸱枭，各服其辜。”
“愿陛下赐臣一月，必令豺狼鸱枭之徒，悉受其罪。”
"I beg Your Majesty to grant me one more month, and I will definitely bring those villains, vicious as jackals, wolves, and owls, to justice."

叩头流血。
阳球叩头叩出了血。
Yang Qiu kowtowed until his head bled.

殿上呵叱曰：“卫尉扞诏邪?”
站在殿上的侍臣呵斥说：“卫尉敢抗诏不遵吗？”
The attendants in the palace hall scolded him and said, "Do you, Chamberlain for Palace Garrison, dare to disobey this order?"

至于再三，乃受拜。
辞让了两三次，才接受任命。
He refused two or three times but in the end accepted the order.

其冬，司徒刘郃与球议收案张让、曹节。
当年冬天，司徒刘郃与阳球谋议收捕张让、曹节。
In winter of that year, the Minister of Education Liu Ge along with Yang Qiu planned to arrest and punish Zhang Rang and Cao Jie.

节等知之，共诬白郃等。
曹节等人知道后，一起诬陷刘郃等人。
Cao Jie and his fellows discovered the plot and accused Liu Ge and others falsely.

语已见《陈球传》。
这件事已载于《陈球传》。
This incident has been recorded in the “Biography of Chen Qiu.”

遂收球送洛阳狱，诛死，妻子徙边。
于是抓了阳球送往洛阳监狱处死，妻子儿女被流放边疆。
Yang Qiu was arrested and imprisoned in the jail of Luoyang and was later executed. His wife and children were exiled to the frontier.


