张俭字元节，山阳高平人，赵王张耳之后也。
张俭字元节，是山阳郡高平县人，是赵王张耳的后代。
Zhang Jian, style named Yuanjie, was a native of Gaoping District in Shanyang Commandery and a descendant of King Zhao, Zhang Er.

父成，江夏太守。
他的父亲张成，官至江夏太守。
His father, Zhang Cheng, served as Governor of Jiangxia.

俭初举茂才，以刺史非其人，谢病不起。
张俭起初被保举为茂才，因为刺史不是个好人，他托病推辞，不肯出仕。
In his early years, Zhang Jian was recommended as a candidate of Cultivated Talent, but since the Regional Inspector was not a good man, he declined the offer on the pretext of illness.

延熹八年，太守翟超请为东部督邮。
延熹八年（公元165年），太守翟超请他担任东部督邮。
In the eighth year of the Yanxi era (165 CE), Governor Zhai Chao invited him to serve as Local Inspector of the Eastern Section.

时中常侍侯览家在防东，残暴百姓，所为不轨。
当时中常侍侯览的家在防东县，他残暴对待百姓，行为不法。
At that time, Palace Attendant-in-Ordinary Hou Lan’s home was in Fangdong District, where he abused the people and acted unlawfully.

俭举劾览及其母罪恶，请诛之。
张俭上奏弹劾侯览及其母亲的罪恶，请求诛杀他们。
Zhang Jian reported the crimes of Hou Lan and his mother to the authorities and requested their execution.

览遏绝章表，并不得通，由是结仇。
侯览压下他的奏章，不让上报，从此两人结下仇怨。
Hou Lan suppressed Zhang Jian’s memorial so it never reached the emperor, and they became bitter enemies.

乡人朱并，素性佞邪，为俭所弃，并怀怨恚。
同乡人朱并，本性谄媚奸邪，被张俭轻视，因此怀恨在心。
A townsman named Zhu Bing, who was by nature deceitful and obsequious, was despised by Zhang Jian and thus bore resentment toward him.

遂上书告俭与同郡二十四人为党，于是刊章讨捕。
于是朱并上书诬告张俭与同郡二十四人结党，于是朝廷下诏追捕。
Zhu Bing then submitted a report falsely accusing Zhang Jian and twenty-four others from the same commandery of forming a political faction, and the court issued an order for their arrest.

俭得亡命，困迫遁走，望门投止，莫不重其名行。
张俭得以逃亡，困苦奔走，见到人家就投宿，人们无不敬重他的名望与品行。
Zhang Jian managed to flee under harsh conditions; wherever he came across a household, he would seek shelter, and all respected his reputation and virtue.


破家相容。
人们冒着家破人亡的危险接纳他。
They admitted him even though it could bring ruin to their own families.

后流转东莱，止李笃家。
后来张俭流亡到东莱，住在李笃家中。
Later, Zhang Jian fled to Donglai and stayed at Li Du’s house.

外黄令毛钦操兵到门，笃引钦谓曰：“张俭知名天下，而亡非其罪。纵俭可得，宁忍执之乎?”
外黄县令毛钦带兵到李笃家门口，李笃拉着毛钦说：“张俭名满天下，逃亡并非有罪。即便能抓到他，你忍心吗？”
District Magistrate of Waihuang, Mao Qin, came armed to Li Du’s house. Li Du took Mao Qin’s hand and said, “Zhang Jian is renowned throughout the world; though he is fleeing, he is not guilty. Even if you could catch him, would you really bear to do so?”

钦因起抚笃曰：“蘧伯玉耻独为君子，足下如何自专仁义?”
毛钦于是起身拍着李笃说：“蘧伯玉以独自为君子为耻，你怎能独占仁义呢？”
Mao Qin stood up, patted Li Du on the shoulder, and said, “Qu Boyu was ashamed to be the only virtuous man — how can you monopolize benevolence?”

笃曰：“笃虽好义，明廷今日载其半矣。”
李笃说：“我虽好义，今日你也分得一半了。”
Li Du replied, “Though I love righteousness, today you share half of it with me.”

钦叹息而去。
毛钦叹息而去。
Mao Qin sighed and left.

笃因缘送俭出塞，以故得免。
李笃通过各种关系送张俭出塞，因此得以免祸。
Li Du helped Zhang Jian escape beyond the frontier, and thus he was saved.

其所经历，伏重诛者以十数，宗亲并皆殄灭，郡县为之残破。
他经过的地方，被杀的人有十多个，宗族亲属皆被诛灭，郡县因此残破。
Along his way, more than ten were executed; his relatives and clansmen were exterminated, and the commanderies and counties were devastated.

中平元年，党事解，乃还乡里。
中平元年（184年），党锢之祸解除，于是他返回家乡。
In the first year of the Zhongping era (184), when the Party Prohibition was lifted, he returned to his hometown.

大将军、三公并辟，又举敦朴，公车特征，起家拜少府，皆不就。
大将军和三公都征召他，又保举为敦朴之士，朝廷以公车礼征召，授少府之职，他都未接受。
The Grand General and the Three Excellencies all summoned him; he was recommended as an Honest and Simple man, and though the court sent an imperial carriage and appointed him Chamberlain for Palace Revenues, he declined all.

献帝初，百姓饥荒，而俭资计差温，乃倾竭财产，与邑里共之，赖其存者以百数。
献帝初年，百姓饥荒，张俭家境尚可，于是倾尽家财与乡里共济，得以赖他存活者百余人。
At the beginning of Emperor Xian’s reign, famine struck; Zhang Jian, still modestly well-off, gave away all his possessions to help his townsfolk, saving more than a hundred lives.

建安初，征为卫尉，不得已而起。
建安初年，朝廷征他为卫尉，不得已而接受。
In the early Jian’an years, he was summoned as Chamberlain for Palace Garrison, and accepted reluctantly.

俭见曹氏世德已萌，乃阖门悬车，不豫政事。
张俭见曹氏篡权之势已现，于是闭门悬车，不参与政事。
When Zhang Jian saw signs of the Cao family’s usurpation, he shut his door and hung up his carriage, withdrawing from politics.

岁余，卒于许下，年八十四。
一年多后，他在许县去世，享年八十四岁。
A little over a year later, he died in Xu at the age of eighty-four.


论曰：昔魏齐违死，虞卿解印，季布逃亡，朱家甘罪，而张俭见怒时王，颠沛假命，天下闻其风者，莫不怜其壮志，而争为之主。
评论说：从前魏齐为避死难，虞卿辞官随之出走；季布逃亡，朱家甘愿为他受罪。而张俭触怒当时的皇帝，颠沛流离，勉强苟活，天下听闻他节操的人，没有不钦佩他的壮志，并纷纷出面庇护他。
Comments: In the past, when Wei Qi was escaping death, Yu Qing resigned from office to accompany him; when Ji Bu fled, the Zhu family willingly suffered punishment for sheltering him. Zhang Jian offended the emperor of his time and lived in hardship, wandering to survive. Everyone who heard of his integrity admired his noble resolve and competed to offer him refuge.

至乃捐城委爵，破族屠身，盖数十百所，岂不贤哉！
甚至有人弃城去职，家族覆灭，身首异处，竟有几十上百人，如此岂不是贤人！
They even abandoned their cities and official posts, ruined their families, and sacrificed their own lives — dozens, even hundreds of such cases. Are they not truly virtuous men!

然俭以区区一掌，而欲独堙江河，终婴疾甚之乱，多见其不知量也！
然而张俭以区区一人之力，想独自抵抗滔天之势，终因过于疾恶权奸而陷身祸乱，可见他也有不自量力之处。
However, Zhang Jian, with only his limited strength, tried to dam the mighty river alone. In the end, his excessive hatred of evil ministers brought calamity upon him, showing that he overestimated his own power.
