梁鸿字伯鸾，扶风平陵人也。父让，王莽时为城门校尉，封修远伯，使奉少昊。后寓于北地而卒。鸿时尚幼，以遭乱世，因卷席而葬。
梁鸿字伯鸾，扶风郡平陵县人。父亲梁让，王莽时官城门校尉，封修远伯，王莽使梁让祭祀西方上帝少昊，后来寓居北地郡而死。梁鸿当时年纪还小，因为遇上乱世，就把父亲的尸体用席子裹着埋了。
Liang Hong, style named Boluan, was a native of Pingling District in Fufeng Commandery. His father, Liang Rang, served under Wang Mang as Commandant of the Capital Gate and was honored with the title of Earl of Xiuyuan. Wang Mang also permitted Liang Rang to perform sacrifices to the Western Divine, Shao Hao. Liang Rang later died while residing in Beidi Commandery. At that time, Liang Hong was still a child, and because of the social disorder, he wrapped his father’s corpse in a bamboo mat for burial.

后受业太学，家贫而尚节介，博览无不通，而不为章句。学毕，乃牧豕于上林苑中。
后来在太学读书，家境贫寒却崇尚独特的节操，饱读群书无所不知，不做寻章摘句的烦琐之学。完成了学业，就在上林苑放猪。
Later he studied at the Imperial University. Even though he was poor, he admired lofty and unique virtues. He read widely from a variety of books and became very knowledgeable, but he did not engage in trivial pedantic studies such as selecting phrases or citing passages. After finishing his studies, he herded pigs in the Imperial Shanglin Garden.

曾误遗火，延及它舍，鸿乃寻访烧者，问所去失，悉以豕偿之。其主犹以为少。鸿曰：“无它财，愿以身居作。”主人许之，因为执勤，不懈朝夕。
曾经不慎失火，蔓延到别人的房屋，梁鸿就寻找到受灾的人家，问他损失了多少，把猪全部拿来做赔偿。那家主人还认为太少。梁鸿说：“我没有别的财产，愿意给你打工。”那家主人答应了，梁鸿就给他们做杂务，从不懈怠。
One time, due to carelessness, he caused a fire that spread to another house. Liang Hong found the affected household, asked them for an accounting of their losses, and offered his pigs as compensation. The owner still thought it was insufficient. Liang Hong said, "I have no other wealth; I am willing to serve you personally." The owner agreed, and Liang Hong diligently did odd jobs for them without ever shirking his duties.

邻家耆老见鸿非恒人，乃共责让主人。
邻居的老人看到梁鸿不是平常人，就都责怪那家主人。
Several old men in the neighborhood, seeing that Liang Hong was no ordinary person, reprimanded his master.

并称赞梁鸿是长者。从此那家主人才敬佩梁鸿，把猪全部还给梁鸿。鸿不受而去，归乡里。
并称赞梁鸿是长者。从此那家主人才敬佩梁鸿，把猪全部还给梁鸿。梁鸿没有接受就离开了，返回自己家乡。
but praised Liang Hong for his superior virtues and manner.Since then, the master came to respect Liang Hong greatly and returned all the pigs to him. Liang Hong did not accept the master's offer but returned to his hometown instead.

势家慕其高节，多欲女之，鸿并绝不娶。
有势力的人家仰慕梁鸿的高尚节操，很多人想把女儿嫁给他，但梁鸿都拒绝不娶。
Many powerful families admired Liang Hong’s lofty virtue and wished to marry their daughters to him, but Liang Hong refused all of them.

同县孟氏有女，状肥丑而黑，力举石臼，择对不嫁，至年三十。
同县孟家有个女儿，肥胖丑黑又力气大，能举起石臼，因为挑剔不嫁人，一直拖到三十岁。
In the same county lived a daughter of the Meng family, who was fat, dark, and ugly but very strong, able to lift a stone mortar, and because she was choosy she did not marry even at thirty.

父母问其故，女曰：“欲得贤如梁伯鸾者。”
父母问她原因，她说：“想嫁给像梁伯鸾那样的贤人。”
Her parents asked the reason, and she replied, “I want to marry a virtuous man like Liang Boluan.”

鸿闻而娉之。
梁鸿听说后便前去聘娶她。
When Liang Hong heard this, he went to propose and marry her.

女求作布衣、麻屦、织作筐、缉绩之具。
女子请求制作布衣、草鞋、织筐和搓绳子的工具。
The girl asked to make coarse clothes, straw sandals, weaving baskets, and rope-making tools.

及嫁，始以装饰入门。
到出嫁时，她才梳妆打扮进门。
When the wedding came, she dressed up and entered his house.

七日而鸿不答，妻乃跪床下请曰：“窃闻夫子高义，简斥数妇，妾亦偃蹇数夫矣。今而见择，敢不请罪”
过了七天梁鸿都不理她，妻子便跪在床下说：“听闻夫子高义拒过多名女子，我择夫时也拒过多人，如今您不理我，我怎敢不请罪？”
Seven days passed and Liang Hong still ignored her, so she knelt by the bed and said, “I heard of your lofty virtue rejecting many women; I too refused many men when choosing a husband. Now that you ignore me, how can I not beg your pardon?”

鸿曰：“吾欲裘褐之人，可与俱隐深山者尔。今乃衣绮缟、傅粉墨，岂鸿所愿哉?”
梁鸿说：“我想要的是能穿粗布衣，与我同隐深山之人。你如今却穿绮丽衣服、涂脂抹粉，这岂是我所愿？”
Liang Hong said, “I want a woman in coarse clothing who can live reclusively with me in the mountains. But now you wear fine silk and paint your face—this is not what I wished.”

妻曰：“以观夫子之志耳。妾自有隐居之服”
妻子说：“我只是试试您的志向。我自有隐居所穿的衣服。”
She replied, “I only wished to test your intention. I have my own clothing for living in seclusion.”

乃更为椎髻，着布衣，操作而前。
于是她重新挽成椎髻，穿上布衣，做着女工走到梁鸿面前。
She then redid her hair in a cone-shaped bun, put on coarse cloth, and came forward doing women’s chores.

鸿大喜曰：“此真梁鸿妻也，能奉我矣!”
梁鸿十分高兴，说：“这才是真正适合梁鸿的妻子，能够顺我的心意！”
Liang Hong was delighted and said, “This is truly the wife of Liang Hong—one who can follow my way!”

字之曰“德曜孟光”
于是给她取字为“德曜”，名为孟光。
He then gave her the style name Deyao and the personal name Meng Guang.


居有顷，妻曰：“常闻夫子欲隐居避患，今何为默默?无乃欲低头就之乎?”
过了一段时期，妻子说：“常听说您想隐居避患，为什么直到现在还没有行动?难道想放弃志向沉沦世俗吗?”
After a while, his wife said, "I have heard you talking about living in solitude and thus escaping from disaster. Why do you not make any progress? Are you thinking about giving up the idea and drowning yourself in this vulgar world?"

鸿曰：“诺。”
梁鸿说：“您说得对。”
Liang Hong said, "You are absolutely right."

乃共入霸陵山中，以耕织为业，咏《诗》《书》、弹琴以自娱。
于是一起到霸陵山中，以耕织为业，咏《诗》《书》，弹琴自娱。
Thus, they went to live on Baling Mountain. They made a living from farming and weaving. They read poetry and books, and played the seven-string zither to please themselves.

仰慕前世高士，而为四皓以来二十四人作颂。
仰慕前代的高士，而选择了商山四皓以来二十四个人为之写颂。
They admired previous recluses. Selecting a total of twenty-four recluses beginning from the Four Old Recluses of Shang Mountain, they wrote eulogies for each.

因东出关，过京师，作《五噫之歌》曰：“陟彼北芒兮，噫!顾览帝京兮，噫!宫室崔嵬兮，噫!人之劬劳兮，噫!辽辽未央兮，噫!”
于是向东出关，经过京师，写了《五噫之歌》，大意说：“登上那北芒山，噫!回头看都城，噫!宫室巍峨，噫!人生劳碌，噫!未来无穷尽，噫!”
They later went eastward to get out of the Pass. While passing through the capital, Liang Hong wrote "The Song of Five Sighs". It said, "Climbing up that Mount Beimang. Alas! I turn my head to gaze at the capital. Alas! The palace buildings are towering and lofty. Alas! Human life is hard toil. Alas! In future it is endless. Alas!"

肃宗闻而非之，求鸿不得。
肃宗听说此事以后，对他进行批评，没有追捕到梁鸿。
When Emperor Su heard it, he was mad at Liang Hong and ordered soldiers to pursue and arrest him. But they did not catch him.

乃易姓运期，名耀，字侯光，与妻子居齐、鲁之间。
梁鸿于是改姓运期，名耀，字侯光，与妻子隐居于齐、鲁之间。
After that, Liang Hong changed his last name to Yunqi, with the given name of Yao, and the style name of Houguang. He lived with his wife in seclusion, somewhere between Qi and Lu.

有顷，又去适吴
不久，他又离开隐居之地前往吴郡
Not long after he left his place of seclusion and went to Wu

将行，作诗曰：“逝旧邦兮遐征，将遥集兮东南
临行前他作诗说：离开旧居远行将去遥远的东南
Before departing he wrote a poem saying: Leaving my old home to travel afar I am going to the distant southeast

心掇怛兮伤悴，志菲菲兮升降
心情忧愁悲伤心志纷乱上下不定
Feeling sad and distressed my heart is unsettled rising and falling

欲乘策兮纵迈，疾吾俗兮作谗
想策马远行憎恶世俗造作谗言
I wish to urge my horse forward resenting the slanderous customs of the world

竞举枉兮措直，咸先佞兮延
世人竞相举用奸邪抛弃正直都以谄媚为先
The crooked raise each other up and the upright are cast aside all give precedence to flattery

聊固靡惭兮独建，冀异州兮尚贤
我虽独立不惭但希望异地仍有尊贤之风
Though I stand alone without shame I hope that in other lands the worthy are still esteemed

聊逍摇兮遨嬉，缵仲尼兮周流
姑且逍遥游历效法孔子周游四方
For now I will wander at ease following Confucius in travelling the world

傥云兮我悦，遂舍车兮即浮
或许能遇到我所喜悦之地陆路不到便舍车乘船
Perhaps I may find a place that delights me and if wagons cannot reach it I will take a boat

过季札兮延陵，求鲁连兮海隅
经过季札封地延陵又到海边寻鲁仲连
I will pass through Ji Zha’s fief Yanling and go to seek Lu Lian at the edge of the sea

虽不察兮光貌，幸神灵兮与休
虽不能识其容貌但愿神灵赐我嘉许
Though I may not recognize their appearance I hope to receive their blessing and approval

惟季春兮华阜，麦含含兮方秀
暮春百花繁盛麦子正要抽穗
In late spring flowers bloom abundantly and the wheat is just beginning to head

哀茂时兮逾迈，愍芳香兮日臭
悲叹好时代已逝芳香一天天衰败
I grieve that prosperous times have passed and the fragrance fades with each day

悼吾心兮不获，长委结兮焉究
悲叹理想难成长期郁结不知如何终结
I lament that my hopes cannot be fulfilled and long have I been troubled with no resolution

口嚣嚣兮余讪，嗟惬惬兮谁留
众口诽谤令我不安不知何处容身
I am slandered by many and in fear I know not where to find refuge

遂至吴，依大家皋伯通，居庑下，为人赁舂。
于是又到吴郡，依附世家豪族皋伯通，住在厢房里，给人做雇工舂米。
After they arrived at Wu Commandery, they sought help and relied for their living on the prestigious and powerful family of Gao Botong. They lived in a wing-room attached to the family mansion, and hired themselves out, pounding rice.

每归，妻为具食，不敢于鸿前仰视，举案齐眉。
每当打工回来，妻子就准备好食物，从不敢在梁鸿面前直接仰视，把盛食物的托盘举得跟眉毛一样高。
Every time Liang Hong came back from work, his wife had already prepared dinner for him. She never dared to raise her head and look at Liang Hong directly, but lifted the serving plates to the height of her eyebrow.

伯通察而异之曰：“彼佣能使其妻敬之如此，非凡人也。”乃方舍之于家。
伯通看到了感到很奇怪，说：“那个打工者能让他的妻子如此敬畏他，不是平常人。”就让他在家里住。
When Botong saw that, he felt strange. He said, "Such labor makes his wife respect him highly. He must not be an ordinary person." Therefore, he asked Liang Hong to live in his house, and no longer requested that he do trivial labor.

鸿潜闭著书十余篇。
梁鸿闭门著书十余篇。
Liang Hong concentrated on studying. He wrote a book with more than ten chapters.

及卒，伯通等为求葬地于吴要离家旁。
等到梁鸿死后，伯通要了一块地将他葬在吴要离墓旁。
After Liang Hong died, Botong bought a piece of land next to Yao Li of Wu State to bury him in.

咸曰：“要离烈士，而伯鸾清高，可令相近。”
众人都说：“吴国的要离是壮烈之人，梁鸿品性清高，可以让他靠近要离。”
Everyone said, "Yao Li of Wu State was a hero—bold and courageous—and Liang Hong was virtuous and honest. It is very proper to get him close to Yao Li."

葬毕，妻子归扶风。
葬完，妻子回到扶风老家。
After the funeral, his wife went back to her hometown, Fufeng.

初，鸿友人京兆高恢，少好《老子》，隐于华阴山中。
早先时候，梁鸿的朋友京兆人高恢，年轻时喜欢读《老子》，隐居在华阴山中。
In earlier times, Liang Hong had a friend named Gao Hui from Jingzhao. As a young man, Gao Hui liked to study Laozi. He lived life as a hermit at Huayin Mountain.

及鸿东游，思恢，作诗曰：“鸟嘤嘤兮友之期，念高子兮仆怀思，想念恢兮爰集兹。”
等到梁鸿向东远游，思念高恢，写了首诗，大意是说：“鸟儿嘤嘤的叫声就是希望寻找到朋友，一想起高子啊我就满心怀念，如此想念高子啊怎能聚会在这里。”
Upon roaming eastward, Liang Hong missed Gao Hui. Thus he wrote a poem: "When birds chirp, they are seeking friends. Every time I think of gentleman Gao, my heart breaks. I miss him so and cannot help asking: Why did I come here?"

二人遂不复相见。恢亦高抗，终身不仕。
二人就不再见面，高恢也高尚抗节，终身不仕。
Once Liang Hong departed, the two never met again. Gao Hui was also a man of lofty virtue and dignity. He had never served in government.