扶风曹世叔妻者，同郡班彪之女也。名昭，字惠姬，博学高才。
扶风郡曹世叔的妻子，是同郡班彪的女儿，名昭，字惠姬，博学高才。
The wife of Cao Shishu from Fufeng Commandery was the daughter of Ban Biao, a fellow townsman of Cao Shishu's. Her first name was Zhao, and her style name was Huiji. She was erudite and talented.

世叔早卒，有节行法度。
曹世叔去世早，班昭有节操法度。
Cao Shishu died early. Ban Zhao was virtuous and had high moral standards.

兄固，著《汉书》，其八表及《天文志》未及竟而卒，和帝诏昭就东观臧书阁踵而成之。
哥哥班固写了《汉书》，其中八表及《天文志》没有写完就死了，汉和帝下诏命班昭到东观藏书阁继续把这部书完成。
Her elder brother Ban Gu had been compiling the History of Former Han, but he died before he could finish the eight memorials and the "Records of Astronomy”. Emperor He of Han issued an edict summoning Ban Zhao to court, and ordered her to go to the Imperial Eastern Library and finish this book.

帝数召入宫，令皇后诸贵人师事焉，号曰大家。
皇帝经常召她入宫，让皇后以及众贵人拜她为师，称之为“大家”。
The emperor often summoned her to the palace, demanding that the empress and consorts learn from her and become her disciples. Everyone addressed her as “Dagu”.

每有贡献异物，辄诏大家作赋颂。
每每有地方进贡的稀奇物品，就命曹大家为这些物品写赋颂。
Whenever a rare and priceless tribute arrived, the emperor would order Cao Dagu to write a rhapsody or eulogy for it.

及邓太后临朝，与闻政事。以出入之勤，特封子成关内侯，官至齐相。
等到邓太后临朝听政，让曹大家参与一些政事。因为进出皇宫做事的功劳，特封她儿子曹成为关内侯，官至齐国相。
When Empress Dowager Deng controlled the court and held power, she asked Cao Dagu to participate in state affairs. Because of her hard work at the palace and the contributions she made, the emperor awarded her son Cao Cheng with the title Marquis of Guannei. Cao Cheng was later appointed Counselor-delegate of Qi State.

时《汉书》始出，多未能通者，同郡马融伏于阁下，从昭受读，后又诏融兄续继昭成之。
当时《汉书》刚刚写出来，大多没有能通晓此书的，同郡马融恭敬地伏在东阁下，跟班昭学习，后来皇帝又下诏命马融的哥哥马续继承班昭完成此书。
At that time, the History of Former Han had just been completed, and it was not known by many. Ma Rong, Ban Zhao's fellow townsman, respectfully kowtowed to her at the Eastern Library and humbly learned from her. Later, the emperor issued an edict ordering Ma Rong's elder brother, Ma Xu, to succeed Ban Zhao in the task of completing the book.

永初中，太后兄大将军邓骘以母忧上书乞身。
永初年间（公元107—113年），邓太后的哥哥大将军邓骘因为母亲去世要服丧制，上书请求解职回乡。
During the Yongchu era (107–113), Deng Zhi, the elder brother of Empress Dowager Deng, submitted a memorial requesting to resign from office to observe mourning for his late mother.

太后不欲许，以问昭。
太后心里不想同意，把这个事询问班昭的意思。
However, the Empress Dowager did not wish to approve the request and turned to Ban Zhao for advice.

昭因上疏曰：“伏惟皇太后陛下，躬盛德之美，隆唐虞之政，辟四门而开四聪，采狂夫之瞽言，纳刍荛之谋虑。
班昭于是上疏说：“皇太后陛下身有盛德之美，把国家治理得像尧舜时代那样兴盛，广泛采纳各方意见建议，甚至采纳狂人、樵夫的愚见。
Ban Zhao submitted a memorial saying, “Your Majesty, the Empress Dowager, possesses the beauty of great virtue. You rule the country as wisely as Yao and Shun did, opening the four gates and four ears to accept opinions even from madmen and woodcutters.

妾昭得以愚朽，身当盛明，敢不披露肝胆，以效万一。
我班昭能以一个愚朽的人，身逢盛明的时代，怎么敢不说出心声，以报效一点恩德呢！
I, your humble subject Ban Zhao, though foolish and ignorant, live in this glorious age — how could I not express my heart sincerely to repay a fraction of Your Majesty’s grace?

妾闻谦让之风，德莫大焉。
我听说谦让之风，没有比这更大的道德了。
I have heard that no virtue is greater than modesty and humility.

故《典》《坟》述美，神祇降福。
所以古书赞扬，天地神灵降下福气。
Thus, the Classics record its beauty, and the spirits of Heaven and Earth bestow blessings for it.

昔夷、齐去国，天下服其廉高。
以前伯夷、叔齐为避位离开自己的国家，天下人都推服他们的廉洁高尚之风。
In ancient times, Bo Yi and Shu Qi left their country to avoid taking the throne, and all under Heaven admired their purity and integrity.

太伯违邠，孔子称为三让。
吴太伯离开邠，孔子称赞他“三以天下让”的至德。
Taibo of Wu left Fen, and Confucius praised him for yielding the empire three times.

所以光昭令德，扬名于后者也。
这就是他们昭显美德，扬名后世的原因。
Therefore, their illustrious virtue shone forth and their names have been honored for generations.

《论语》曰：“能以礼让为国，于从政乎何有！”
《论语》说：“能用礼让的道理治理国家，对于为政又有什么难呢！”
In the Analects it is said, “If one rules the state with propriety and modesty, what difficulty could there be in governing?”

由是言之，推让之诚，其致远矣。
由此看来，谦让的美德，其功用是很远大的啊。
From this we can see that the virtue of humility reaches far and endures long.

今四舅深执忠孝，引身自退，而以方垂未静，拒而不许。
现在皇帝的四个舅舅深执忠孝之道，请求辞职，您却因为边疆没有安定，不同意他们。
Now, the emperor’s four maternal uncles, deeply loyal and filial, have requested to withdraw from office, yet Your Majesty refuses because the borders are still unsettled.

如后有毫毛加于今日，诚恐推让之名，不可再得。
如果今后发生了细小的过错，不就湮没了今天的美名吗？我真怕推让的美名不可再得。
If any small mistake should occur in the future, I fear the honorable name of humility will be lost and cannot be regained.

缘见逮及，故敢昧死竭其愚情。
因为拜见您，您亲自询问，我才敢冒死尽述愚情。
Because Your Majesty has graciously asked my opinion, I dare to risk my life to offer this humble advice.

永初中，太后兄大将军邓骘以母忧上书乞身。
永初年间，大将军邓骘因母亲去世上书请求辞职。
During the Yongchu era (107–113), Deng Zhi, the elder brother of Empress Dowager Deng, submitted a letter requesting to resign from his post due to mourning for his mother.

太后不欲许，以问昭。
太后不想同意，便问班昭的意见。
The Empress Dowager did not wish to approve it and asked Ban Zhao for her opinion.

昭因上疏曰：“伏惟皇太后陛下，躬盛德之美，隆唐虞之政，辟四门而开四聪，采狂夫之瞽言，纳刍荛之谋虑。
班昭于是上疏说：“皇太后陛下有盛德之美，政事如唐虞之盛，广开言路，采纳百姓的意见。
Ban Zhao then presented a memorial, saying, “Your Majesty, the Empress Dowager, possesses great virtue and governs with the enlightened rule of Yao and Shun, opening the four gates and listening to the voices of all, even accepting the words of madmen and the advice of woodcutters.

妾昭得以愚朽，身当盛明，敢不披露肝胆，以效万一。
我班昭虽愚陋，却生逢盛世，怎敢不尽心竭力以报恩德。
I, your humble servant Ban Zhao, though foolish and ignorant, am fortunate to live in this glorious age; how could I not express my sincere heart to repay even a fraction of Your Majesty’s grace?

妾闻谦让之风，德莫大焉。
我听说谦让之风是最大的美德。
I have heard that the virtue of humility and modesty is the greatest of all virtues.

故《典》《坟》述美，神祇降福。
所以古书都加以赞美，天地神灵也因此降下福祉。
Thus, the ancient classics praise it, and the deities of Heaven and Earth bestow their blessings upon those who practice it.

昔夷、齐去国，天下服其廉高；
从前伯夷、叔齐离开自己的国家，天下人都佩服他们的高洁。
In the past, Bo Yi and Shu Qi left their homeland, and the world admired their integrity and loftiness.

太伯违邠，孔子称为三让。
吴太伯离开邠地，孔子称赞他“三次让天下”。
Taibo of Wu departed from Fen, and Confucius praised him for “yielding the empire three times.”

所以光昭令德，扬名于后者也。
因此他们的美德光耀千古，声名流传后世。
Thus their virtues shone brightly, and their names were honored through later generations.

《论语》曰：‘能以礼让为国，于从政乎何有!’
《论语》说：“能以礼让之德治理国家，从政又有什么难的呢！”
The Analects says: “If one governs a state with propriety and humility, what difficulty can there be in administration?”

由是言之，推让之诚，其致远矣。
由此可见，谦让之道影响深远。
From this, it is clear that the virtue of yielding brings far-reaching results.

今四舅深执忠孝，引身自退，而以方垂未静，拒而不许。
如今皇帝的四位舅舅坚持忠孝，请求辞职，而您因边疆未安，不许他们离职。
Now, the emperor’s four uncles, upholding loyalty and filial piety, have requested to withdraw, but Your Majesty refuses because the frontiers are not yet stable.

如后有毫毛加于今日，诚恐推让之名，不可再得。
若今后稍有不当之事，恐怕推让的美名将不复再得。
If later even the slightest mistake occurs, I truly fear that the reputation for modesty will be lost forever.

缘见逮及，故敢昧死竭其愚情。
因蒙召见，所以冒死尽言陈情。
Having been granted audience, I therefore dare, despite my humble station, to express my sincere thoughts without concealment.

自知言不足采，以示虫蚁之赤心。
我自己知道这些话没有什么值得采用的，不过是想表示我的一片忠诚而已。
I understand that my opinion is not worth listening to. It is just that I want to express my wholehearted loyalty.

太后从而许之，于是骘等各还里弟焉。
太后听了班昭的话，同意了邓骘的请求，因此邓骘等人分别回家。
Empress Dowager accepted Ban Zhao’s advice and approved Deng Zhi’s request. Thus, Deng Zhi and others returned to their homes respectively.

作《女诫》七篇，有助内训。
班昭写了《女诫》七篇，有助于家庭内部的教育。
Ban Zhao wrote The Admonition for Women, consisting of seven chapters, which helped guide family instruction.

马融善之，令妻女习焉。
马融认为《女诫》写得好，让妻子与女儿学习。
Ma Rong praised the work and asked his wife and daughters to study it.

昭女妹曹丰生亦有才惠，为书以难之，辞有可观。
班昭的女妹曹丰生也有才智，写信驳难《女诫》，文辞优美。
Ban Zhao’s younger sister-in-law, Cao Fengsheng, was also talented and wise; she wrote letters challenging The Admonition for Women, and her writing was remarkable.

昭年七十余卒，皇太后素服举哀，使者监护丧事。
班昭七十多岁去世，皇太后穿素服举哀，并派使者监护丧事。
Ban Zhao died at over seventy years of age; Empress Dowager Deng wore mourning clothes and sent envoys to oversee the funeral.

所著赋、颂、铭、课、问、注、哀辞、书论、上疏、遗令，凡十六篇。
班昭所著赋、颂、铭、课、问、注、哀辞、书论、上疏、遗令等共十六篇。
Her works included rhapsodies, eulogies, inscriptions, essays, questions, commentaries, mourning notes, letters, discussions, memorials, and valedictory memorials—sixteen in total.

子妇丁氏为撰集之，又作《大家赞》焉。
儿媳丁氏为她编集遗作，并作《大家赞》。
Her daughter-in-law, Lady Ding, compiled her works and wrote Eulogy to Cao Dagu for her.

