孔子曰：“与其不得中庸，必也狂猾乎!”
孔子说：“与其不能得中庸之人与之相交，那么一定要跟志向远大和猾介的人相交!”
Confucius said, "If I cannot befriend a man of the Middle Way, then I must befriend a man with much ambition and vision, and as well, a man who is timid and cautious."

又云：“狂者进取，猾者有所不为也。”
又说：“志向远大的人一意进取，猾介的人绝不做坏事。”
Also, he said, "A man with great ambition and vision is focused and keeps forging ahead, while a timid and cautious man prevents himself from wrongdoing."

此盖失于周全之道，而取诸偏至之端者也。
这大概是说既不能得圆满之道的人，也要向偏于一极的人取法。
Likely, this is to say that although one may not have a perfect man to learn from, one should learn at least from someone expert in one specific aspect.

然则有所不为，亦将有所必为者矣；既云进取，亦将有所不取者矣。
这样看来，那么有所不为，也将有所必为的事；既然说进取，也将有所不取的事。
This teaches us that even if one man does not do something, there must be another thing which he is willing to do. Even though a man forges ahead, there is still something he will not pursue.

如此性尚分流，为否异适矣。
像这样，性格和喜好各有不同，这样做、那样做各有所适。
In this case, each person is different in terms of personality and proclivity. It is the individual situation that determines what a person will do.

中世偏行一介之夫，能成名立方者，盖亦众也：
三代以后行为没有合乎中庸的人，能够成名立道的也很多。
At the end of the Three Dynasties, the individual did not exist who could be called Man of the Middle Way. However, many men became famous through forging their own paths.

或志刚金石，而克扞于强御；或意严冬霜，而甘心于小谅；
有的意志刚如金石，而能不畏强御。有的思想严于冬霜，而情愿坚持小信。
With a determination firm as gold and stone, some were not afraid of the powerful; others, with thoughts as dry and restrained as a severe winter frost, insisted upon shallow loyalties.

亦有结朋协好，幽明共心；蹈义陵险，死生等节。
也有友谊和谐，生死同心；坚守正义甘冒风险，无论死生不变节操。
Some shared harmonious friendships with others, united in one heart, even after death. Others were upright, willing to run risks. Such men never changed their minds, whether dead or alive.

虽事非通圆，良其风轨有足怀者。
尽管这些人事迹不一定圆满中庸，他们的风格确实有值得令人怀念之处。
Even though the ways of such individuals may not have approached the Middle Way, their styles were worthy of remembrance.

而情迹殊杂，难为条品，片辞特趣，不足区别，措之则事或有遗，载之则贯序无统。
而事迹各不相同，很难为他们分类品评；少量的语言、独特的志趣，不足以区分类别。不记录下来就会使事迹有所丢失，记录下来就会串联起来没有一个中心思想。
Because of the difference in their ways, it is difficult to categorize and evaluate them;Some only left us a few words, or were known solely by unique behavior—which was insufficient to differentiate them. If we don't record them, however, their doings will be lost. And yet, recording them, we find no central point to connect them.

以其名体虽殊，而操行俱绝，故总为《独行篇》焉。
因为这些人表现出来的事迹和内在的修养虽然不同，但操行都很特异，所以汇集成为《独行篇》。
Because the names and entities of these people were so different, while the inner cultivation and outer manifestations of these people were so unique as well, we have put them together in the “Biographies of Solitaries”.

庶备诸阙文纪志漏脱云尔。
只希望使阙文得以补充、漏脱得以记录而已。
We hope that here, the lost may be found, and the missing restored.