卫飒字子产，河内修武人也。家贫好学问，随师无粮，常佣以自给。
卫飒字子产，河内郡修武县人家境贫困，喜好学问，跟随老师读书，没有吃的，常常给人打工以养活自己。
Wei Sa, style named Zichan, was a native of Xiuwu District in Henei Commandery. He was from a poor family, but he was fond of learning. While studying with his teacher, he often had to do part-time jobs to support himself since he had no food to eat.

王莽时仕郡历州宰。建武二年，辟大司徒邓禹府，举能案剧，除侍御史、襄城令，政有名迹。
王莽时，出仕于郡，在州县都做过事。建武二年(公元26年),征召进大司徒邓禹府。邓禹举荐他能处理繁难的政事，任命为侍御史、襄城县令。为政有好的名声和政绩。
During Wang Mang's era, he served as an officer in the commandery and its districts. In the second year of the Jianwu era (26), he was summoned to serve in Grand Minister of Education Deng Yu's household. Deng Yu was impressed by his ability to deal with complex and difficult governmental affairs, so he appointed him Attendant Censor and District Magistrate of Xiangcheng. He had a good reputation for managing governmental affairs astutely.

迁桂阳太守，郡与交州接境，颇染其俗，不知礼则飒下车修庠序之教，设婚姻之礼，期年间邦俗从化。
升为桂阳太守。桂阳郡与交州接境，桂阳也颇受到交州民俗的影响，不知礼节法度。卫飒刚上任，推行学校教育，设立婚姻的礼仪。一年时间，郡的风俗得到感化。
He was promoted to the Governorship of Guiyang. Guiyang Commandery shared a border with Jiaozhou, so the customs of Jiaozhou—no propriety or regulation—exerted some influence in Guiyang. Immediately upon assuming his post, Wei Sa began promoting institutional education and establishing rules of etiquette for weddings and marriages. Within the time span of one year, the customs of Guiyang Commandery had been edified and transformed significantly.


先是含涯、浈阳、曲江三县，越之故地。武帝平之，内属桂阳。
在此之前，含涯、浈阳、曲江三县，是百越的旧地，被汉武帝平定，隶属于桂阳。
Right before this time, the three Districts of Hankuang, Zhenyang, and Qujiang originally belonged to Bai Yue, and they were pacified by Emperor Wu of Han. Now, they belonged to Guiyang Commandery.

民居深山，滨溪谷，习其风土，不出田租。去郡远者或且千里，吏事往来辄发民乘船，名曰传役。每一吏出，徭及数家，百姓苦之。
人民居住在深山里，靠近溪谷，习染百越风气，不肯交纳田租。离开郡治远的地方，有的有将近千里之遥。政务往来，就征发百姓驾船，称为“传役”。每当一个官吏出行，需要几户人家为其服务，百姓以此为苦。
The local people lived in deep mountains, close to streams and valleys. They were influenced by Bai Yue's customs, so they were unwilling to submit land taxes. Some of the remote areas were as far as one thousand li from the seat of the Commandery government. Whenever there was an official business trip, local people were ordered to pilot a boat. This custom was called “Summoned Labor.” Whenever an official needed to take a trip, members of several households were summoned to service. The public suffered.

飒乃凿山通道五百余里，列亭传，置邮驿，于是役省劳息，奸吏杜绝。流民稍还，渐成聚邑，使输租赋，同之平民。
卫飒于是开凿山岭打通道路有五百多里，在路边设立亭传邮驿。于是减少了百姓的徭役和劳苦，杜绝了奸邪官吏为害百姓，流亡的百姓逐渐回来，慢慢形成村镇，让他们缴纳田租赋税，和一般平民一样。
Therefore, Wei Sa cut a tunnel through mountains and built a five-hundred-li road. All along the route, he established lodges and stations so that couriers could do official business there. This plan greatly reduced the local people's hardship and suffering, preventing evil officials from harming them any longer. As a result, local people who had been refugees gradually returned. Villages and towns were rebuilt over time, and they paid land taxes just as the populace elsewhere did.

又耒阳县出铁石，他郡民庶，常依因聚会，私为冶铸，遂招来亡命，多致奸盗。
还有耒阳县出产铁石，其他郡的老百姓常在这里聚集，暗中冶铁铸钱，于是引来了许多犯罪逃亡的人，多有奸人盗匪聚在这里。
Leiyang District also produced iron ore, which enticed many people from other commanderies to gather there. People melted iron in secret and forged coins. As a result, the place attracted plenty of robbers and thieves as well as run-away criminals.

飒乃上起铁官，罢斥私铸，岁所增入，五百余万。
卫飒于是上书在这里设置铁官，禁止私人铸造，每年增加的收入有五百多万。
Wei Sa thus submitted a report requesting that an official position be established for the management of the iron business. In this way, he could prevent people from making coins privately. The government could also get more than five million annually for the state coffers.

飒理恤民事，居官如家，其所施政，莫不合于物宜。视事十年，郡内清理。
卫飒管理抚恤百姓事务，在任上像在家里一样，他所施行的政令，没有不符合事物规律的。在桂阳任职十年，郡内一切井井有条。
While performing official duties, Wei Sa sometimes dealt with common people's matters. In such cases, he treated the commoners as if they were family members. The policies he made were in accordance with proper patterns and regulations. The result of his ten-year service in Guiyang was that everything in the commandery was now in perfect order.


二十五年征还，光武欲以为少府，会飒被疾，不能拜起，敕以桂阳太守归家，须后诏书。
建武二十五年(公元49年),卫飒被征召回去。光武帝想让他担任少府，刚好这时候卫飒生病了，行动困难，光武帝敕令他以桂阳太守的身份待遇回家养病，等候日后的诏书。
In the twenty-fifth year of the Jianwu era (49), Wei Sa was summoned back to the capital. Emperor Guangwu wanted to appoint him Chamberlain for Palace Revenues. Just about this time, Wei Sa fell sick. He had a difficult time moving. Emperor Guangwu issued a decree allowing him to return home for recovery, with the salary of the Governorship of Guiyang. He was to wait for a future imperial summon.

居二岁，载病诣阙，自陈困笃。乃收印绶，赐钱十万。
过了两年，卫飒抱病乘车来到皇宫，说自己病已经很重，光武帝这才收回他的印绶，赏赐十万钱。
Two years later, Wei Sa boarded his carriage and returned to the palace despite his illness. He reported to the emperor, saying that his illness was very serious. Emperor Guangwu took back his official seal, and rewarded him with ten thousand in coin.

后卒于家。南阳茨充代飒为桂阳，亦善其政教民种殖桑、柘、麻、纻之属，劝令养蚕、织屦，民得利益焉。
后来卫飒死于家中。南阳人茨充接替卫飒担任桂阳太守，也有善政，教育人民种植桑、柘、麻、纻这些农作物，劝说百姓养蚕、织鞋，百姓从中得到利益。
Later, Wei Sa died at home. Ci Chong of Nanyang replaced Wei Sa as Governor of Guiyang, and he also did good service. He not only taught the local people to cultivate agricultural products such as mulberry, cudrania, hemp, and ramie, but also encouraged them to engage in sericulture, and to make shoes, from which they would benefit for sure.
