韩康字伯休，一名恬休，京兆霸陵人。家世著姓。
韩康字伯休，一名恬休，京兆霸陵县人。他家世代是大姓豪族。
Han Kang, style named Boxiu, alternatively named Tianxiu, was a native of Baoling District in one of the Metropolitan Areas. For generations, his family had enjoyed prestige and power.

常采药名山，卖于长安市，口不二价，三十余年。
他经常到名山采药草，卖到长安集市，口不二价三十多年。
He often visited famous mountains to collect medical herbs. He sold them at the Chang'an market. He had not bargained with customers for over thirty years.

时有女子从康买药，康守价不移。
当时有个女子向韩康买药，韩康坚持价格不变。
Once, a woman came to buy herbal medicine from Han Kang. He insisted on his price.

女子怒曰：“公是韩伯休那?乃不二价乎?”
女子发脾气说：“你是韩伯休啊?怎么不让讨价还价?”
The woman grew angry and said, "Are you Han Boxiu? Why can't you reduce the price?"

康叹曰：“我本欲避名，今小女子皆知有我，何用药为?”
韩康感叹道：“我卖药的初衷是想躲避外在的名气，现在连一个小女子都知道我的名字，还卖什么药?”
Han Kang sighed, saying, "Originally, my reason for selling herbal medicine was to escape from my reputation. Now, even a young woman like you knows my name. Why sell herbs for that?"

乃遁入霸陵山中。
于是逃入霸陵山中隐居。
He ran away to Baoling Mountain and hid himself there as a hermit.

博士公车连征不至。桓帝乃备玄熏之礼，以安车聘之。使者奉诏造康，康不得已，乃许诺。辞安车，自乘柴车，冒晨先使者发。
博士公车连着征召他都不去。桓帝于是备了玄熏之礼，用安车去聘请他。使者带着诏书拜访韩康，韩康没办法，于是答应了。不坐安车，乘着自己的柴车，趁着早晨比使者先出发。
The official chariot for the Erudite was sent to Han Kang over and over, but he always declined the invitation. Emperor Huan thus prepared an honorable black-and-red garment and a small one-horse chariot to recruit him. Once the envoy had brought the edict to Han Kang, he was left with no other option but to agree. However, he did not mount the chariot that the emperor had sent, but rode his own wooden cart. He took off in the early morning before the envoy did.

至亭，亭长以韩征君当过，方发人、牛修道桥。及见康柴车幅巾，以为田叟也，使夺其牛。康即释驾与之。
到了驿亭，亭长因为韩征君要经过这里，正征发人、牛修理道路桥梁。等看见韩康坐着柴车头戴幅巾，以为他是个种田老头，派人夺他的牛。韩康马上解开车驾把牛给了他。
Just as he arrived at the courier station, the Neighborhood Head was drafting laborers and oxen to repair the road, for the Honorable Mr. Han would be passing through. The Neighborhood Head saw Han Kang sitting astride a wooden cart, wearing a strip of cloth about his head. He therefore took Han Kang for an old farmer. The Head sent someone to take Han Kang's ox, and Han Kang released the ox from the cart immediately.

有顷，使者至，夺牛翁乃征君也。使者欲奏杀亭长。康曰：“此自老子与之，亭长何罪?”乃止。
过了一会儿，使者到了，亭长知道了被自己夺牛的老头就是韩征君。使者想奏报杀了亭长。韩康说：“牛本来就是我给他的，亭长有什么罪!”于是就不追究亭长了。
After a while, the envoy arrived, and the Head realized that the old man whose oxen he had requisitioned was the Honorable Mr. Han himself. The envoy wanted to turn the Neighborhood Head in and execute him, but Han Kang said, "I gave him my ox willingly, so what crime has he committed?” Therefore, the Neighborhood Head was off the hook.

康因中道逃遁，以寿终。
韩康在半路上逃掉了，后来以高寿而终。
Han Kang fled on his way to the capital and he died at an advanced age.