范滂字孟博，汝南征羌人也。
范滂，字孟博，汝南郡征羌人。
Fan Pang, style named Mengbo, was a native of Zhengqiang in Runan Commandery.

少厉清节，为州里所服。
他从小就培养自己高尚的节操，为州里的人所佩服。
Since a very young age, he had been strict with himself, and was admired by his townsmen for his moral integrity.

举孝廉、光禄四行。
被举荐为孝廉，以“敦厚”、“质朴”、“逊让”、“节俭”四行举荐光禄。
He was recommended as a Filial and Incorrupt candidate and for his four virtues: sincerity, honesty, modesty, and frugality.

时冀州饥荒，盗贼群起，乃以滂为清诏使案察之。
那时冀州地区发生饥荒，盗贼在各地纷纷而起，于是任命范滂为清诏使，去冀州调查处理。
At that time, the Jizhou area was suffering from famine, with bandits rising up everywhere, so the court appointed Fan Pang as an Imperial Commissioner to investigate the matter.

滂登车揽辔，慨然有澄清天下之志。
范滂登上马车，拉起缰绳，慷慨激昂，有澄清天下污秽的志向。
Fan Pang mounted his chariot, grasped the reins, and passionately declared his ambition to cleanse the world of corruption.

及至州境，守令自知臧污，望风解印绶去。
到了冀州后，太守县令自知贪污受贿，听说范滂来了，都自动辞官离去。
When he reached Jizhou, the local officials, knowing themselves guilty of corruption, resigned in fear upon hearing of his arrival.

其所举奏，莫不厌塞众议。
范滂所上奏的案件，没有不让人信服的。
Everything that Fan Pang investigated and reported met with unanimous approval.

迁光禄勋主事。
于是升迁为光禄勋主事。
He was promoted to be Administrative Aide of the Chamberlain for Attendants.

时陈蕃为光禄勋，滂执公仪诣蕃，蕃不止之。
这时陈蕃担任光禄勋，范滂拿着公事去拜访他，陈蕃却不接见。
At that time, Chen Fan served as Chamberlain for Attendants. Fan Pang went to visit him officially, but Chen Fan refused to meet him.

滂怀恨，投版弃官而去。
范滂心中感到遗憾，遂弃官离去。
Feeling deeply aggrieved, Fan Pang resigned from his post and left.

郭林宗闻而让蕃曰：
郭林宗听说此事，便责备陈蕃说：
When Guo Linzong heard of this incident, he reproached Chen Fan, saying:


若范孟博者，岂宜以公礼格之?今成其去就之名、得无自取不优之讥也!”蕃乃谢焉
郭林宗听说后，责备陈蕃说：“像范滂这样的人才，难道应该用一般的礼节来要求他吗?现在你成全他辞官的美名，岂不是自己选择了没有用优礼相待人才的非议吗?”陈蕃于是向范滂道歉
reproached Chen Fan and said,"How can you treat a talent like Fan Pang with a commoner's etiquette? Now that you would help him increase his reputation by making him resign from office. Would you choose this criticism by failing to employ superior etiquette in your treatment of him?” Accordingly, Chen Fan apologized to Fan Pang.

复为太尉黄琼所辟。
范滂不久又被太尉黄琼举荐。
Not long afterwards, Fan Pang was again recommended by Defender-in-chief Huang Qiong.

后诏三府掾属举谣言，滂奏刺史、二千石权豪之党二十余人。
这时皇上下诏三府属下的有关部门上奏反映官吏好坏的歌谣，范滂奏劾了二十多个刺史、二千石的权贵。
At that time, the emperor issued a decree ordering the subordinates of the Three Dukes to collect folk songs which reflected well upon administrative officers. Fan Pang reported more than twenty Regional Inspectors and powerful two-thousand-bushel officials.

尚书责滂所劾猥多，疑有私故。
尚书责备范滂弹劾的人太多，疑心他公报私仇。
Imperial Secretariat reproached Fan Pang for impeaching too many officials, suspecting he was probably abusing public power to avenge personal enemies.

滂对曰：“臣之所举，自非叨秽奸暴深为民害，岂以污简札哉!间以会日迫促，故先举所急；其未审者，方更参实。臣闻农夫去草，嘉谷必茂；忠臣除奸，王道以清。若臣言有贰，甘受显戮。”吏不能诘。
范滂回答说：“我弹劾的人，都是贪污刻薄残暴的奸贼，是害人之人，难道我会为了自己的私利玷污国事吗?因为碰上规定的时间太急促了，所以我先弹劾最紧要的，那些来不及调查清楚的，以后再慢慢查清吧。我听说农夫除掉杂草后，好的禾苗才会茂盛；忠臣除掉奸贼后，皇上的周围才会变得干净。如果我的话有贰心，甘愿受重刑。”审问的官吏无话可说了。
To this Fan Pang replied, "These evil people who I have reported have all been convicted with corruption, harshness, and cruelty. All of them are doing great harm to the people. How can you believe that I would have sullied our national affairs for my personal interest? The reason [for reporting on this large number of high-ranking officials] is because I was given a very short time to do this work. Accordingly, I have to report the most urgent offences first. As for those cases without obvious evidence, I will investigate them gradually later. It is said that only after a farmer removes all the weeds can the good crops flourish; only after a loyal official gets rid of evil and petty men will the emperor be surrounded by lofty people. If you find me disloyal, I am willing to be sentenced to death by hanging." The official who was interrogating him could not say even a word in response.


滂睹时方艰，知意不行，因投劾去。
范滂看到当今的时势正处于混乱的时候，知道自己的理想不能实现，于是辞官而去。
Fan Pang found that current social conditions were chaotic and confused. He realized that he could not achieve his dream. Therefore, he resigned and left.

太守宗资先闻其名，请署功曹，委任政事。
太守宗资早听说范滂的名声，请求朝廷任命他功曹处理政事。
Governor Zong Zi had heard about Fan Pang's good reputation long ago. Therefore, he made a request to the court to appoint Fan Pang as an official in the Labor Section to manage official affairs.

滂在职严整疾恶，其有行违孝悌，不轨仁义者，皆埽迹斥逐，不与共朝。
范滂在任上严格整顿那些坏人坏事，将那些在不孝顺长辈、不尊敬兄长、不遵循仁义礼制的人全部辞退，不与他们共事。
Once Fan Pang assumed office, he detested all the evil people committing evil acts. He disassociated himself with those who were not filial to their parents, those who did not respect seniors, and those who did not follow the virtues of righteousness, and he dismissed them.

显荐异节，抽拔幽陋。
他公开推荐品德特别高尚的人，提拔贫寒之士。
He recommended those who were particularly virtuous and lofty, and promoted those who were from poor and unprivileged families.

滂外甥西平李颂，公族子孙，而为乡曲所弃。
范滂的外甥是西平的李颂，是达官贵人的子弟，被同乡的人所不齿。
Li Song, Fan Pang’s nephew, was an offspring from a prominent family but was despised by his townsmen.

中常侍唐衡以颂请资。资用为吏，滂以非其人，寝而不召。
中常侍唐衡向宗资请求，宗资任命他做小官。范滂却认为外甥李颂不是好人，就把这件事压下来不办理。
Palace Attendant-in-ordinary Tang Heng made a request to Zong Zi, who then gave Li Song a minor post to serve. However, Fan Pang knew that his own nephew Li Song was not a good man; therefore, he suppressed the matter, declining to handle it.

资迁怒，捶书佐朱零。
宗资把怒气转嫁到书佐朱零的身上，鞭打朱零。
Zong Zi was very angry. He shifted his rage by beating the clerical assistant Zhu Ling.

零仰曰：“范滂清裁，犹以利刃齿腐朽，今日宁受笞死，而滂不可违。”
朱零仰起头说：“范滂的裁断廉明公正，好像用锋利的刀刃锯断腐朽的东西。今天我宁愿受鞭打而死，我绝不违反范滂的决定。”
Zhu Ling raised his head and said, “What Fan Pang does is incorrupt and fair, like using a sharp knife to cut out the rotten parts. I am willing to be beaten to death today, but I will never run counter to Fan Pang’s decision.”

资乃止。郡中中人以下莫不归怨。乃指滂之所用，以为范党。
宗资只好作罢。郡中见识低下的人，没有一个不怨恨范滂的，他们于是都指责范滂所任用的人，认为他们都是范滂的同党。
Zong Zi had no option but to give up. People lacking knowledge and experience in the commandery all greatly resented Fan Pang. They criticized the officials who were appointed by Fan Pang and claimed that these officials were all from Fan Pang’s clique.


后牢修诬言钩党，滂坐系黄门北寺狱。
后来牢修诬告朝中有人结党营私，范滂受牵连被捕，关在黄门北寺监狱。
Later, Lao Xiu made a false accusation of clique-forming in court. As a result, Fan Pang was arrested, owing to his association with those accused, and imprisoned in the Palace Prison.

狱吏谓曰：“凡坐系皆祭皋陶。”
狱吏对他说：“凡是被捕的人都要祭祀皋陶。”
The prison official said to Fan Pang, “Those arrested are accustomed to worshipping Gao Yao.”

滂曰：“皋陶贤者，古之直臣，知滂无罪，将理之于帝；如其有罪，祭之何益!”
范滂说：“皋陶是贤德的人，是古代正直的忠臣。他知道我无罪，就会把我的冤情告诉天帝；如果我确实有罪，祭祀他又有什么益处呢?”
Fan Pang replied, “Gao Yao was a sage, a loyal and upright subject in ancient times. He knows I am innocent and will report my injustice to Heaven; but if I were truly guilty, what benefit would there be in worshipping him?”

众人由此亦止。
那些人因为这个原因也不再祭祀皋陶了。
As a result of Fan’s words, the arrested ceased worshipping Gao Yao.

狱吏将加掠考，滂以同囚多婴病，乃请先就格。
狱吏准备对范滂等人施用刑罚，范滂以狱友大多患病为由，请求自己先受刑。
The prison officials were preparing punishment for Fan Pang and his fellows. Since most of them were suffering from illness, Fan Pang requested to be punished first.

遂与同郡袁忠争受楚毒。
于是他与同郡的袁忠争着先受刑罚。
As a result, he and his townsman Yuan Zhong competed to be tortured first.

桓帝使中常侍王甫以次辨诘，滂等皆三木囊头，暴于阶下。
桓帝派中常侍王甫按照次序审判这些人，范滂等人脖子、手脚都戴着刑具，头也被包着，站在台阶下。
Emperor Huan ordered Palace Attendant-in-ordinary Wang Fu to bring the prisoners to trial in sequence. The necks, hands, legs, and heads of Fan Pang and the others were fettered and covered, as they stood below the stairs.

余人在前，或对或否。滂、忠于后越次而进。
其他的人在前面，有的回答，有的不作声，范滂、袁忠从后面走到前面，主动受审。
Some of the others in front answered, while others kept silent. Fan Pang and Yuan Zhong stepped forward from the rear row to be tried first.

王甫诘曰：“君为人臣，不惟忠国，而共造部党，自相褒举，评论朝廷，虚描无端，诸所谋结，并欲何为?皆以情对，不得隐饰!”
王甫质问说：“你们是朝廷之臣，不想着对国家尽忠，反而结成朋党，互相吹捧，毁谤朝廷，虚构一些无中生有的事情，你们搞各种阴谋活动，想要达到什么目的?都要据实招来，不得隐瞒!”
Wang Fu questioned, “You are court officials, yet you are not loyal to the state. You form cliques, praise each other, criticize the court, and fabricate baseless rumors. What is your purpose in all this scheming? You must confess truthfully and conceal nothing!”

滂对曰：“臣闻仲尼之言，‘见善如不及，见恶如探汤’，欲使善善同其后。”
范滂回答说：“我听孔子讲过，‘看到善良的行为，好像赶不上似的，看到邪恶的行为，好像把手伸进开水里一样’，我想要使善良的行为和善良的人都得到效法。”
Fan Pang replied, “I have heard the words of Confucius: ‘When seeing good, act as if you fear being too late; when seeing evil, act as if you were touching boiling water.’ I wish that goodness and good men may be emulated by all.”


清，恶恶同其污，谓王政之所愿闻，不悟更以为党。
清正的名声，想要使恶的行为和做恶的人都受到污秽的评价，我认为这些都是推行王道的统治者所希望听到的，实在不懂这怎么又能算是结党。
He was upright and wanted evil deeds and wicked people to be condemned with disgrace. He believed this was what a ruler following the kingly way wished to hear, and could not understand why this was taken as forming a clique.

甫曰：“卿更相拔举，迭为唇齿，有不合者，见则排斥，其意如何？”
王甫又问道：“你们互相提拔，关系密切，有意见与你们不合的人，看见了就排斥他，你们的用意是什么？”
Wang Fu said, “You recommend and support each other, acting as close allies. When someone disagrees with you, you reject them. What is your intention in doing this?”

滂乃慷慨仰天曰：“古之循善，自求多福；今之循善，身陷大戮。身死之日，愿埋滂于首阳山侧，上不负皇天，下不愧夷、齐！”
范滂于是慷慨激昂地抬起头来说：“古代的人遵循好的品行，是为了追求美满幸福；现在我遵循好的品行，竟然身陷监狱！我被处死的那天，希望你们把我埋在首阳山的旁边，对上我没有对不起苍天，对下我没有愧对伯夷、叔齐。”
Fan Pang raised his head and said passionately, “In ancient times, those who followed goodness sought their own blessings. Now that I follow goodness, I face great punishment. When I die, I wish to be buried beside Mount Shouyang—so that I may not be ashamed before Heaven above, nor before Boyi and Shuqi below.”

甫愍然为之改容，乃得并解桎梏。
王甫为之恻然改容，于是一并为他们打开镣铐。
Wang Fu was moved with pity and changed his expression, then ordered the shackles to be removed from all of them.

滂后事释南归，始发京师，汝南、南阳士大夫迎之者数千两。
后来范滂被诬结党的事得到澄清，从京城洛阳出发，回到南方，汝南、南阳的士大夫迎接他的有几千辆车子。
Later, when Fan Pang was cleared of the false accusation of conspiracy, he departed from the capital Luoyang to return south, and thousands of scholar-officials from Runan and Nanyang came to welcome him in their carriages.

同囚乡人殷陶、黄穆亦免俱归，并卫侍于滂，应对宾客。
一同被囚禁的同乡人殷陶、黄穆，也免罪一起回家，他们一起护卫侍奉范滂，接待宾客。
His fellow townsmen and former prisoners Yin Tao and Huang Mu were also pardoned and returned home with him, accompanying and attending Fan Pang in receiving guests.

滂顾谓陶等曰：“今子相随，是重吾祸也。”遂遁还乡里。
范滂看着殷陶等人说：“如今你们跟随我，这是加重我的祸患啊。”于是逃回了乡里。
Fan Pang turned to Yin Tao and the others and said, “By following me now, you only deepen my misfortune.” Then he fled back to his hometown.


初，滂等系狱，尚书霍请理之。及得免，到京师，往候谓而不为谢。
当初，范滂等被关押在监狱中，尚书霍谓负责审理他们的案件。等到获释后，范滂到了京城，前去拜会霍谓，却没有表示感谢。
At first, when Fan Pang and the others were imprisoned, the Minister Huo Wei was in charge of investigating their case. When they were acquitted, Fan Pang went to the capital to visit Huo Wei, but he did not express any gratitude.

或有让滂者，对曰：“昔叔向婴罪，祁奚救之，未闻羊舌有谢恩之辞，祁老有自伐之色。”竟无所言。
有人责怪范滂不知感恩，范滂回答说：“从前叔向被治罪，祁奚救了他，但从未听说叔向有谢恩之言，也未见祁奚老先生有自夸之色。”最后他一句感谢的话也没说。
Someone reproached him for being ungrateful, but Fan Pang replied, “In ancient times, when Yangshe Shuxiang was convicted, Qi Xi rescued him. Yet we never heard Yangshe utter words of thanks, nor did the old gentleman Qi boast about it.” In the end, he said nothing more.

建宁二年，遂大诛党人。诏下，急捕滂等。
建宁二年（公元169年），朝廷大肆诛杀被诬陷为结党的人，诏书一下，立即命令逮捕范滂等人。
In the second year of the Jianning era (169 CE), the court began a great purge of those accused of forming factions. Once the imperial decree was issued, Fan Pang and others were to be arrested immediately.

督邮吴导至县，抱诏书、闭传舍，伏床而泣。滂闻之曰：“必为我也！”即自诣狱。
督邮吴导到县后，抱着诏书，关上传舍的大门，趴在床上哭泣。范滂听说后，说：“这一定是为了我啊！”于是自己前往县狱自首。
When the local inspector Wu Dao arrived at the county, he held the imperial edict close to his chest, shut himself in the guesthouse, and lay on the bed crying. Hearing this, Fan Pang said, “It must be because of me!” and went straight to the prison to surrender himself.

县令郭揖大惊，出解印绶，引与俱亡，曰：“天下大矣，子何为在此？”
县令郭揖大为惊惧，解下印绶，想带范滂一起逃亡，说：“天下这么大，你为什么非要留在这里呢？”
The county magistrate Guo Yi was astonished. He removed his official seal and wanted to flee with Fan Pang, saying, “The world is vast—why must you stay here?”

滂曰：“滂死则祸塞，何敢以罪累君，又令老母流离乎！”
范滂说：“我死了祸就止了，怎敢因为我的罪连累您，又让老母流离失所呢？”
Fan Pang replied, “If I die, the disaster will end. How could I implicate you in my crime and cause my aged mother to wander homeless?”

其母就与之诀，滂白母曰：“仲博孝敬，足以供养，滂从龙舒君归黄泉，存亡各得其所。”
母亲前来与他诀别，范滂对母亲说：“弟弟仲博孝顺，足以奉养您。我将追随先父龙舒君入黄泉，生者与死者各得其所。”
His mother came to bid farewell. Fan Pang said to her, “My younger brother Zhongbo is filial enough to care for you. I will follow my late father, Lord Longshu, to the underworld. The living and the dead shall each find their place.”


惟大人割不可忍之恩，勿增感戚。
希望母亲大人能割舍这难以承受的恩情，不要增添悲伤。
I only hope, dear mother, that you can cut off this unbearable affection and not add more grief to yourself.

母曰：“汝今得与李、杜齐名，死亦何恨！既有令名，复求寿考，可兼得乎？”
母亲说：“你现在可以和李膺、杜密齐名，死了又有什么遗憾呢！既然已有美名，又要追求长寿，岂能兼得？”
His mother said, “Now you can stand side by side with Li Ying and Du Mi in reputation—what regret can there be in death? Having earned such fame, how could you also hope for long life? Can both be had together?”

滂跪受教，再拜而辞。
范滂跪下接受母亲的教诲，拜了两拜后辞别。
Fan Pang knelt to receive his mother’s teaching, bowed twice, and took his leave.

顾谓其子曰：“吾欲使汝为恶，则恶不可为。使汝为善，则我不为恶。”
他回头对儿子说：“我若教你为恶，恶事不可为；若教你为善，我却因善而死。”
Turning to his son, he said, “If I would have you do evil, evil cannot be done; if I would have you do good, I myself am dying for doing no evil.”

行路闻之，莫不流涕，时年三十三。
路人听见他的话，无不落泪。当时范滂年仅三十三岁。
Those who heard him along the road all wept. At that time, Fan Pang was thirty-three years old.

论曰：李膺振拔污险之中，蕴义生风，以鼓动流俗，激素行以耻威权，立廉尚以振贵势，使天下之士奋迅感概，波荡而从之。
评论说：李膺从污浊险恶的世道中奋然自拔，蕴蓄道义，树立清风，用以激励世俗之风，振奋高洁之行，使有权势者知耻，使尊贵者自省，使天下士人激昂奋发，感慨而相从。
Commentary: Li Ying rose above the filth and danger of his times, nurturing righteousness and raising a pure spirit. He inspired worldly customs, stirred noble conduct, made the powerful feel shame, and the noble self-reflect. The scholars of the realm were moved and followed him in waves of moral passion.

幽深牢、破室族而不顾，至于子伏其死，而母欢其义，壮矣哉！
他被囚禁于深牢，家族破败亦不顾，至于儿子甘心赴死，而母亲为义而喜，真壮烈啊！
He endured deep imprisonment and the ruin of his household without regret—his son willingly faced death, and his mother rejoiced in his righteousness. How grand and tragic!

子曰：“道之将废也与？命也！”
孔子说：“大道将要衰亡了吗？这是命运啊！”
Confucius said, “Is the Way about to perish? Then it must be destiny!”
