田单者，齐诸田疏属也。
田单，是齐国田氏王族的远亲。
Tian Dan belonged to a distant branch of the royal house of Tian in the state of Qi.

缗王时，单为临蓄市掾，不见知。
齐湣王时，田单作临淄市场的掾吏，不为人所知。
During the reign of King Min, he was a minor official in Linzi.

及燕使乐毅伐破齐，齐湣王出奔，已而保莒城。
等到燕国派乐毅攻破齐国，齐湣王出逃，后来在莒城坚守城池。
When Yue Yi, a general of the state of Yan, defeated the army of Qi, King Min fled from his capital to the city of Ju.

燕师长驱平齐，而田单走安平，令其宗人尽断其车轴末而傅铁笼。
燕军长驱直入平定了齐国，田单逃到安平，让他的同族人把他们的车轴两头全都锯断，裹上铁箍。
while the soldiers of Yan advanced unopposed to conquer Qi. Then Tian Dan fled to Anping and ordered his clansmen to saw off the projecting ends of their chariot-axles and fit iron guards around the stumps.

己而燕军攻安平，城坏，齐人走，争途，以辖折车败，为燕所虏。
不久燕军攻打安平，城被攻破，齐国人逃跑，争着赶路，因为车轴头撞折、车子毁坏，被燕军俘虏。
When the troops of Yan took Anping by storm, the men of Qi fled, and in the melee on the road, the other chariots’ axle ends broke and their occupants were captured.

唯田单宗人以铁笼故得脱，东保即墨。
只有田单的同族人用铁箍裹住车轴头得以逃脱，向东退守即墨。
Tian Dan and his kinsmen were the only ones to escape, thanks to their reinforced axles, and they went east to defend Jimo.

燕既尽降齐城，唯独莒、即墨不下。
燕国已经完全降服了齐国的城邑，只有莒城、即墨没有攻下。
Alone of all the cities of Qi, Ju and Jimo were holding out against Yan.

燕军闻齐王在莒，并兵攻之。
燕军听说齐王在莒城，就合兵攻打莒城。
As the men of Yan knew that King Min was in Ju, they attacked the city in strength.

淖齿既杀缗王于莒，因坚守距燕军，数年不下。
淖齿已经在莒城杀死了齐湣王，就坚守莒城抵抗燕军，好几年没有被攻下。
Nao Chi assassinated the king and defended Ju stubbornly, holding out against the besiegers for several years.

燕引兵东围即墨，即墨大夫出与战，败死。
燕国领兵向东包围了即墨，即墨大夫出城和燕军交战，战败被杀。
Yan’s troops then marched east to lay siege to Jimo. Its governor going out to give battle was defeated and killed.

城中相与推田单，曰：“安平之战，田单宗人以铁笼得全，习兵。”
城中的人共同推举田单，说：“安平之战时，田单的同族人因为用铁箍裹车轴得以保全，他熟悉军事。”
The defenders at once chose Tian Dan to lead them, saying, “In the battle of Anping, Tian Dan’s kinsmen escaped because of the iron guards fitted to their axles. He understands warfare.”

立以为将军，以即墨距燕。
就立田单为将军，让他凭借即墨抵抗燕军。
They made him their commander to defend Jimo.

以为将军，以即墨距燕。
（田单被）立为将军，凭借即墨抵抗燕军。
( Tian Dan was ) made commander to defend Jimo against Yan.

顷之，燕昭王卒，惠王立，与乐毅有隙。
不久，燕昭王去世，燕惠王继位，（惠王）和乐毅有嫌隙。
Soon after this, King Zhao of Yan died. His successor, King Hui, had an aversion to Yue Yi.

田单闻之，乃纵反间于燕，宣言曰：“齐王已死，城之不拔者二耳。”
田单听说这件事，就派人到燕国施行反间计，扬言说：“齐王已经死了，齐国没被攻下的城邑只有两座了。”
and when Tian Dan knew this, he sowed further dissension between them by declaring, “Qi’s king is dead and only two of its cities remain to be taken.”

宣言曰：“乐毅畏诛而不敢归，以伐齐为名，实欲连兵南面而王齐。”
（田单让人）扬言说：“乐毅害怕被杀死而不敢回燕国，他以讨伐齐国为名，实际想联合齐国兵力在齐国称王。”
( Tian Dan had people ) declare, “But Yue Yi dares not return for fear of punishment. Under the pretext of subjugating Qi, he is hoping to combine his forces with those of Qi and make himself king here.”

宣言曰：“齐人未附，故且缓攻即墨以待其事。”
（田单让人）扬言说：“齐国百姓还没归附他，所以他暂且缓攻即墨来等待时机。”
( Tian Dan had people ) declare, “He is delaying his attack so that the men of Qi may come over to his side.”

宣言曰：“齐人所惧，唯恐他将之来，即墨残矣。”
（田单让人）扬言说：“齐国人害怕的，只是担心其他将领来（攻打即墨），那样即墨就会被攻破了。”
( Tian Dan had people ) declare, “The one thing we fear is that another general might be appointed, for then Jimo must be destroyed.”

燕王以为然，使骑劫代乐毅。
燕惠王认为（这些话）是对的，派骑劫代替乐毅（担任将领）。
The king of Yan believed this and made Qi Jie take over Yue Yi’s command.

乐毅因归赵，燕人士卒忿。
乐毅于是归附赵国，燕国的士兵们都很愤怒。
and Yue Yi went back to Zhao, to the great indignation of the soldiers of Yan.

而田单乃令城中人食必祭其先祖于庭，飞鸟悉翔舞城中下食。
田单就下令让城里的人吃饭时一定要在庭院里祭祀祖先，（这样）飞鸟都飞到城中盘旋飞舞着啄食。
Then Tian Dan ordered the citizens of Jimo to sacrifice to their ancestors in the courtyard before each meal, so that birds flocked down to the city to find food.

燕人怪之。
燕军士兵对此感到奇怪。
to the astonishment of the besiegers.

田单因宣言曰：“神来下教我。”
田单于是扬言说：“有神人下来教导我。”
“A man with supernatural powers will be our teacher.”

乃令城中人曰：“当有神人为我师。”
（田单）就对城里的人下令说：“会有神人来做我的老师。”
Then he told the citizens, “A man with supernatural powers will be our teacher.”

有一卒曰：“臣可以为师乎？”
有一个士兵说：“我可以做（您的）老师吗？”
“Can I be that teacher?” cried a soldier.

因反走。
（说完）就转身跑开。
and was running off.

田单乃起，引还，东乡坐，师事之。
田单就站起来，把他拉回来，让他面向东坐下，像对待老师一样侍奉他。
when Tian Dan stood up and led him to a seat facing east, treating him as a teacher.

卒曰：“臣欺君，诚无能也。”
那个士兵说：“我欺骗了您，实在没有什么本事。”
“I was fooling, sir. I have no special powers,” said the soldier.

田单曰：“子勿言也！”
田单说：“您不要说了！”
“Hush!” whispered Tian Dan.

因师之。
于是就把他当作老师。
He treated the man as a teacher with divine powers.

每出约束，必称神师。
每次发布号令，一定说是神师的指示。
and attributed all the orders he gave to his divine teacher.

乃宣言曰：“吾唯惧燕军之劓所得齐卒，置之前行，与我战，即墨败矣。”
（田单）就扬言说：“我们只害怕燕军把俘虏的齐国士兵割去鼻子，把他们放在队伍前列来和我们交战，那样即墨就会失败了。”
Tian Dan also declared, “My one fear is lest the soldiers of Yan cut off the noses of the captured Qi soldiers and place them in the front ranks against us. For then Jimo is doomed.”

燕人闻之，如其言。
燕军士兵听说了这话，就照着田单说的做了。
The men of Yan, hearing this, acted accordingly.

城中人见齐诸降者尽劓，皆怒，坚守，唯恐见得。
城里的人看到齐国投降的士兵全都被割了鼻子，都很愤怒，严密防守，唯恐被（燕军）俘虏。
When the defenders saw that all the surrendered men had their noses cut off, they were furious and fortified their defenses, determined not to be captured.

单又纵反间曰：“吾惧燕人掘吾城外冢墓，侮先人，可为寒心。”
田单又派人施行反间计说：“我们担心燕军挖掘我们城外的祖坟，侮辱我们的祖先，这会让人感到寒心。”
Tian Dan also spread a rumor, saying, “We fear the invaders will dig up the graves outside the city and desecrate our ancestors, which would chill our hearts.”

燕军尽掘垄墓，烧死人。
燕军把城外的坟墓全都挖开，焚烧尸体。
The Yan army proceeded to dig up the graves and burn the corpses.

即墨人从城上望见，皆涕泣，俱欲出战，怒自十倍。
即墨人从城墙上望见（这情景），都痛哭流涕，全都想出城作战，愤怒之情增加了十倍。
The people of Jimo, seeing this from the city walls, wept and were eager to fight, their anger tenfold.

田单知士卒之可用，乃身操版插，与士卒分功，妻妾编于行伍之间，尽散饮食飨士。
田单知道士兵们可以任用了，就亲自拿着夹板和铲子（参与修筑工事），和士兵们分担劳动，把自己的妻妾编入军队，把全部饮食都拿出来犒劳士兵。
Knowing that the soldiers were ready, Tian Dan himself worked with them, wielding tools and sharing the labor. He organized his wives and concubines into the ranks, distributed food and drink to the soldiers.

令甲卒皆伏，使老弱女子乘城，遣使约降于燕，燕军皆呼万岁。
（田单）命令全副武装的士兵都埋伏起来，让老弱妇孺登上城墙（防守），派使者到燕军那里约定投降，燕军士兵都高呼万岁。
and had the armored men lie in ambush while the old and weak and women mounted the walls. Envoys were sent to negotiate surrender with the Yan army, prompting great cheers from the enemy.

田单又收民金，得千溢，令即墨富豪遗燕将，曰：“即墨即降，愿无虏掠吾族家妻妾，令安堵。”
田单又收集百姓的黄金，得到一千镒，让即墨的富豪把黄金送给燕军将领，说：“即墨就要投降了，希望（您）不要掳掠我们家族的妻妾，让我们能平安居住。”
Tian Dan also collected a thousand yi of gold from the populace, which the wealthy citizens of Jimo presented to the Yan general, saying, “Jimo is about to surrender. Please spare our wives, concubines, and kinsmen, so that we may live in peace.”

燕将大喜，许之。
燕军将领非常高兴，答应了（他们的请求）。
The Yan general was delighted and agreed.

燕军由此益懈。
燕军因此更加松懈。
The Yan army became increasingly lax.

田单乃收城中得千余牛，为绛缯衣，画以五彩龙文，束兵刃于其角，而灌脂束苇于尾，烧其端。
田单就在城里收集到一千多头牛，给它们披上大红绢衣，画着五彩的蛟龙花纹，在它们角上捆上兵刃，把灌满油脂的芦苇绑到牛尾上，点燃芦苇的末端。
Tian Dan gathered more than a thousand bulls inside the city, swathed them in red silk, painted them with multicolored dragon patterns, tied daggers to their horns, and attached oil-soaked reeds to their tails, setting the reeds on fire.

凿城数十穴，夜纵牛，壮士五千人随其后。
把城墙凿了几十个洞，夜里放出牛，有五千名壮士跟随在火牛之后。
Dozens of breaches were made in the city walls, and at night the bulls were released, followed by five thousand brave soldiers.

牛尾热，怒而奔燕军，燕军夜大惊。
牛尾着火，牛群发怒奔向燕军，燕军夜里大为惊骇。
Enraged by their burning tails, the bulls charged the Yan troops, who were greatly alarmed in the night.

牛尾炬火光明炫耀，燕军视之皆龙文，所触尽死伤。
牛尾火炬光亮耀眼，燕军看到的都像是龙形图案，触及的士兵尽死伤。
The flaming tails shone brightly, and to the Yan soldiers, the patterns looked like dragons, killing or wounding all they touched.

五千人因衔枚击之，而城中鼓噪从之，老弱皆击铜器为声，声动天地。
五千人趁机咬住牙签冲击燕军，城中人跟着鼓噪，老弱者敲铜器助阵，声音震动天地。
The five thousand soldiers then charged, holding sticks in their mouths, and the city residents shouted and beat drums in unison, while the old and weak beat copper vessels to make a thunderous noise.

燕军大骇，败走。
燕军大为惊恐，溃败逃跑。
The Yan army, terrified, fled in disorder.

齐人遂夷杀其将骑劫。
齐军遂杀死燕将骑劫。
The Qi forces killed the Yan general Qi Jie.

燕军扰乱奔走，齐人追亡逐北，所过城邑皆畔燕而归田单，兵日益多，乘胜，燕日败亡，卒至河上，而齐七十余城皆复为齐。
燕军混乱逃窜，齐军追击北上，所经过的城邑皆背叛燕国归顺田单，军队日益增多，乘胜追击，燕军日益败亡，最终退至黄河边，齐国七十余城都恢复为齐国所辖。
As the Yan troops fled north in confusion, every city they passed defected to Tian Dan, whose army grew daily. Taking advantage of successive victories, the Yan forces were repeatedly defeated, and eventually retreated to the Yellow River, leaving all seventy-plus cities of Qi restored.

乃迎襄王于莒，入临蓄而听政。
随后迎接襄王自莒城回到临蓄处理政务。
Tian Dan then escorted King Xiang from Ju to Linzi to govern.

襄王封田单，号曰安平君。
齐襄王封田单为安平君。
and the king enfeoffed Tian Dan as Lord of Anping.

太史公曰：兵以正合，以奇胜。
太史公说：作战要以正面交锋与敌，同时出奇兵以取胜。
The Grand Historian comments: In war, one engages the enemy head-on with regular tactics while employing surprise tactics to win.

善之者，出奇无穷。奇正还相生，如环之无端。
善于用兵的人，奇兵变化无穷，奇正互生，如环无端。
A skilled commander’s use of surprise is boundless, and the interplay between regular and surprise tactics is endless, like a circle without beginning or end.

夫始如处女，适人开户；后如脱兔，适不及距：其田单之谓邪!
开始时如处女般柔弱，使敌人不设防；随后如脱兔般迅捷，使敌措手不及——这就是田单的奇计。
Initially passive like a young girl, lulling the enemy into complacency, then swift as an escaped hare, overtaking them unexpectedly—this describes Tian Dan’s surprise tactics.

初，淖齿之杀滑王也，莒人求滑王子法章，得之太史嫩之家，为人灌园。
起初，淖齿杀了齐滑王，莒城的人寻找齐滑王之子法章，在太史嫩家中找到了他，当时他在替人灌园。
When Nao Chi assassinated King Min, the people of Ju sought out his son Fazhang, finding him working as a gardener in the house of Taishi Nen.

嫩女怜而善遇之。
太史嫩的女儿怜悯他，对他很好。
The daughter of the family took pity on him and treated him kindly.

后法章私以情告女，女遂与通。
后来法章私下告诉她自己的身份，他们便私通。
Fazhang privately revealed his identity to her, and they became lovers.

及莒人共立法章为齐王，以莒距燕，而太史氏女遂为后，所谓“君王后”也。
当莒人共同立法章为齐王以守莒城抵御燕国时，太史嫩的女儿便成为王后，这就是所谓“君王后”。
Later, when the people of Ju crowned Fazhang as king to hold the city against Yan, she became the queen, the so-called “Chief Lady.”

燕之初入齐，闻画邑人王蟠贤，令军中曰“环画邑三十里无入”，以王蜀之故。
燕国初入齐时，听说画邑人王蟠贤良，便下令军中：“环绕画邑三十里不要进入”，这是因为王蜀的关系。
When Yan first entered Qi, they heard that Wang Pan of Huayi was virtuous, and issued an order forbidding troops to enter a thirty-li area around his residence, because of Wang Shu’s connection.

已而使人谓蟠曰：“齐人多高子之义，吾以子为将，封子万家。”
不久又派人对王蜀说：“齐国人多赞赏你的高义，我任命你为将，封你万家。”
Soon after, messengers told Wang Shu, “The people of Qi praise your virtue. We appoint you as a general and grant you ten thousand households.”

蜀固谢。
“我谢绝了。”
Wang Chu firmly declined.

燕人曰：“子不听，吾引三军而屠画邑!”
燕国人说：“你不听从，我就率三军屠杀画邑！”
The envoys said, “If you do not agree, we shall lead three armies to destroy Huayi district!”

王蟠曰：“忠臣不事二君，贞女不更二夫。齐王不听吾谏，故退而耕于野。国既破亡，吾不能存；今又劫之以兵为君将，是助桀为暴也。与其生而无义，固不如烹!”
王蜀说：“忠臣不能事奉两个君王，贞女不能更换两个丈夫。齐王没有采纳我的劝谏，所以我退隐田野耕作。国家已经破亡，我已无所保全；现在你们又要用兵逼我做你们的将领，这无异于助桀作恶。与其活着却失去道义，不如自焚而死！”
Wang Chu replied, “A loyal minister cannot serve two masters, and a chaste woman cannot change husbands. Since the king of Qi ignored my advice, I retired to till the fields. The kingdom is already lost and I have nothing to preserve; now you try to force me to be your general, which is aiding a tyrant in his oppression. Rather than live without virtue, I choose to die!”

遂经其颈于树枝，自奋绝胆而死。
于是他把脖子挂在树枝上，奋力自尽。
He then tied his neck to a tree branch and broke it with a strong effort, ending his life.

齐亡大夫闻之，曰：“王蟠，布衣也，义不北面于燕，况在位食禄者乎!”
齐国流亡的大夫们听闻后说：“王蜀只是布衣百姓，却坚守道义不向燕国称臣，更何况我们这些在位领取俸禄的人呢！”
When the exiled ministers of Qi heard of this, they said, “Wang Chu was a commoner, yet he refused to submit to Yan. How much more should those of us in office with salaries uphold righteousness!”

乃相聚如莒，求诸子，立为襄王。
于是大家聚集在莒城，寻找齐王的儿子，将他拥立为齐襄王。
They then gathered at Ju, sought out the prince, and crowned him as King Xiang of Qi.