《老子》曰：“至治之极，邻国相望，鸡狗之声相闻，民各甘其食，美其服，安其俗，乐其业，至老死不相往来。”
《老子》里说：“秩序最好的国家，彼此相邻，鸡鸣狗叫都可以互相听得见，人们都对自己的吃穿觉得不错，对自己的风俗习惯以及自己所从事的工作感到很满意，直至老死不相往来。”
Lao Zi said, "When perfect government prevailed, although neighbouring states within sight of each other could hear the crowing of each other's cocks and the barking of each other’s dogs, the people of each enjoyed their own food, admired their own clothing, were content with their ways and happy in their work, and would grow old and die without having any dealings with each other."

必用此为务，貌近世涂民耳目，则几无行矣。
谁要是用这种神话来麻醉和愚弄人民，并企图用这个来挽救国家的衰败，那是不可能有好效果的。
Yet if we tried to set the world right today by stopping up the eyes and ears of the people, it would prove well-nigh impossible.

太史公曰：夫神农以前，吾不知已。
太史公说：神农氏以前的状况，我没法说。
The Grand Historian comments: What it was like before the time of Shen Nong I do not know.

至若《诗》、《书》所述虞夏以来，耳目欲极声色之好，口欲穷刍豢之味，身安逸乐，而心夸矜轨能之荣。
至于像《诗》、《书》所讲说的虞舜、夏禹以来，人们都是耳朵想听最好的声音，眼睛想看最好的颜色，嘴想尝到最好的滋味，身体追求最好的享受，精神上追求最大的权势和最高的荣耀。
but, judging by the Book of Songs and Book of Documents, ever since the time of Emperor Shun and the Xia Dynasty men have desired to feast their eyes on beautiful women, their ears on music; their mouths have delighted in meat, their bodies in pleasure and comfort, and their hearts in power and glory.

使俗之渐民久矣，虽户说以眇论，终不能化。
人们受这种风气的浸染由来已久，即使你想挨门逐户地去劝说也无论如何改不了。
Even if you went from door to door reasoning with them, such deep-rooted habits as these could never be changed.

故善者因之，其次利道之，其次教诲之，其次整齐之，最下者与之争。
对待这种问题最好的办法是顺其自然，其次是引导它，再次是教育它，再次是规范它，最坏的办法是去同他们竞争。
The best thing, then, is to let matters take their own course; the next is to lead people through benefiting them; the next to use exhortations; the next, restrictions; and the worst way of all is to fight against these instincts.

夫山西饶材、竹、榖、纯、旄、玉石；
关西地区盛产木材、竹子、榖枝、紵布、旄牛、玉石；
Roughly speaking, the region west of the mountains has an abundance of timber, bamboo, grain, mulberry, hemp, yak hide and jade.

山东多鱼、盐、漆、丝、声色；
山东地区盛产鱼、盐、漆、丝，以及歌儿舞女；
the region east of the mountains is rich in fish, salt, lacquer, silk, musicians and beautiful women.

江南出柚、梓、姜、桂、金、锡、连、丹沙、犀、玳瑁、珠玑、齿革；
江南地区盛产楠木、梓材、姜、桂、金、锡、铅、丹砂、犀角、玳瑁、珍珠以及象牙鱼皮等；
South of the Yangtse are catalpa, cedars, ginger, cassia, gold, tin, lead, cinnabar, rhinoceros horns, tortoise shell, pearls, ivory and hides.

龙门、碣石北多马、牛、羊、旃裘、筋角；
龙门、碣石以北盛产马、牛、羊、毡袍、筋、角；
north of Longmen and Jieshi are horses, cattle, sheep, felt, furs, tendons and horns in plenty.

铜、铁则千里往往山出棋置：此其大较也。
铜和铁在许多地区的山里都出产，像棋子一样密布：以上是就其大概而言。
As for copper and iron, the mountains stretching thousands of li are scattered with mines. This is the general outline.

皆中国人民所喜好，谣俗被服饮食奉生送死之具也。
这些东西都是我国人民所喜爱，都是大家日常生活中穿衣、饮食、养生、送死所需要的物品。
All these commodities are valued by the people of China, who use them for food and clothing, to supply the living and to bury the dead.

故待农而食之，虞而出之，工而成之，商而通之。
所以要依靠农民耕种才有粮食吃，依靠掌管山林湖泽的人开发才能获得物产，依靠工匠加工才能制成器物，依靠商人流通才能使物资周转。
There must be farmers to produce food, men to extract the wealth of mountains and marshes, artisans to process these things and merchants to circulate them.

此宁有政教发征期会哉？
这些活动难道需要靠政令教化来征调安排、规定期限吗？
There is no need to wait for government orders.

人各任其能，竭其力，以得所欲。
人们各自发挥自己的才能，竭尽自己的力量，来获取自己想要的东西。
each man will play his part, doing his best to get what he desires.

故物贱之征贵，贵之征贱，各劝其业，乐其事，若水之趋下，日夜无休时，不召而自来，不求而民出之。
所以物品价格低了，就会向价格高的地方流动；价格高了，就会向价格低的地方流动。人们各自勤勉于自己的职业，乐于从事自己的工作，就像水往低处流一样，日夜不停，不用召唤就自己前来，不用索取百姓就主动生产。
So cheap goods will go where they fetch more, while expensive goods will make men search for cheap ones. When all work willingly at their trades, just as water flows ceaselessly downhill day and night, things will appear unsought and people will produce them without being asked.

岂非道之所符，而自然之验邪？
这难道不是符合客观规律，并且是自然法则的体现吗？
For clearly this accords with the Way and is in keeping with nature.

《周书》曰：“农不出则乏其食，工不出则乏其事，商不出则三宝绝，虞不出则财匮少。”
《周书》上讲：“农夫不耕种，粮食就会匮乏；工匠不劳作，器物就会短缺；商人不流通，‘三宝’就会断绝；掌管山林湖泽的人不开发，财物就会缺少。”
The Book of Zhou says, "Without farmers, food will be scarce; without artisans, goods will be scarce; without merchants, the three precious things will disappear; without men to open up the mountains and marshes, there will be a shortage of wealth."

财匮少而山泽不辟矣。
财物缺少，山林湖泽也就难以进一步开发了。
Here we have the four sources of men's food and clothing.

此四者，民所衣食之原也。
这四种行业，是百姓穿衣吃饭的根本来源。
When these sources are large there is prosperity; when small, there is scarcity.

原大则饶，原小则鲜。
根本丰厚，物资就富足；根本微薄，物资就短缺。
Above, they enrich a state; below, they enrich a family.

上则富国，下则富家。
对上能使国家富裕，对下能使家庭富足。
The laws governing poverty and wealth are immutable, and the shrewd have plenty while the stupid go short.

贫富之道，莫之夺予，而巧者有余，拙者不足。
贫富的规律，不是谁能随意剥夺或赐予的，精明的人会有余裕，笨拙的人会有不足。
When the Patriarch Lü Shang was given Yingqiu as his fief, the land was swampy and brackish and sparsely inhabited.

故太公望封于营丘，地渴卤，人民寡，于是太公劝其女功，极技巧，通鱼盐，则人物归之，繦至而辐凑。
所以姜太公被封在营丘，那里土地贫瘠多盐碱，人口稀少。于是太公鼓励妇女从事纺织，极力发展手工技艺，开通鱼盐贸易，这样，人才和物资就像绳索相连、车轮辐条聚向轴心一样汇聚到齐国。
but he encouraged the women to work, developed skilled occupations and opened up trade in fish and salt, so that men and goods poured in from every side.

故齐冠带衣履天下，海岱之间敛袂而往朝焉。
所以齐国制作的帽子、衣带、衣服、鞋子传遍天下，东海、泰山之间的诸侯都整理衣袖，恭敬地前往朝拜齐国。
Soon the state of Qi was supplying the whole world with caps, belts, clothes and shoes, and the states between the Eastern Sea and Mount Tai paid respectful homage to it.

其后齐中衰，管子修之，设轻重九府，则桓公以霸，九合诸侯，一匡天下；
后来齐国中途衰落，管仲整顿治理，设立掌管财政货币的“轻重九府”机构，于是齐桓公得以称霸，多次会合诸侯，一度匡正天下秩序。
Later, Qi's power declined, but Guan Zhong restored it by setting up a new currency and nine treasuries. As a result, Duke Huan of Qi became an overlord and nine times summoned the other feudal lords to conferences, bringing order to the whole empire.

而管氏亦有三归，位在陪臣，富于列国之君。
管仲也拥有“三归”的家产，虽然职位只是诸侯的大夫，财富却超过了各国的君主。
Guan Zhong was rewarded with the fief of Sangui, and although his rank was only that of a servant's servant, he amassed greater wealth than the princes of other states.

是以齐富强至于威、宣也。
因此齐国的富强一直延续到齐威王、齐宣王时期。
So Qi remained rich and powerful through the reigns of King Wei and King Xuan.

故曰：“仓廪实而知礼节，衣食足而知荣辱。”礼生于有而废于无。
所以有人说：“仓库里东西多，人们才懂得礼节；吃饱穿暖后，人们才会知道什么叫耻辱。”礼节须人富了才能讲究。
Thus it is said, "When the granaries are full, men learn propriety. When food and clothing are enough, men have a sense of honour and shame. Ceremony is born of sufficiency and disappears in time of want.”

故君子富好行其德，小人富以适其力。
好人富了就会做好事，坏人富了就会逞凶。
That is why when a gentleman is rich he delights in cultivating virtue, but when an inferior man is rich he will display his power.

渊深而鱼生之，山深而兽往之，人富而仁义附焉。
水越深的地方鱼越多，山越深的地方兽越多，人要富了就会有仁义之名。
Just as fish multiply in deep lakes and wild beasts flock to deep mountains, humanity and justice follow riches.

富者得势益彰，失势则客无所之。以而不乐，夷狄益甚。
富有的人有了势力，名声就会越来越大；失去了权势的人，门前来客也就不多了。中原地区如此，夷狄更是这个样子。
A wealthy man's influence is greater while he has power, but once he loses power his protegés have nowhere to go and there is an end of pleasure. This is even more true of the barbarians.

谚曰：“千金之子，不死于市。”此非空言也。
俗话说：“家有千金的人，绝不会被处死在街头上。”这是有根据的。
As the proverb justly says, “A man with a thousand pieces of gold will not die in the market-place."

故曰：“天下熙熙，皆为利来；天下壤壤，皆为利往。”
所以说：“天下人纷纷扰扰，一切活动都是为了利。”
So it is said, "How quickly after gain The whole world races! How madly after gain The whole world chases!"

夫千乘之王，万家之侯，百室之君，尚犹患贫，而况匹夫编户之民乎！
具有千辆战车的国王，具有万户领地的诸侯，具有百家领地的封君，还都害怕受穷，更何况是一般的平头百姓呢。
Even the king of a land with a thousand chariots, a marquis with a fief of ten thousand households, or a lord with a hundred households dreads poverty, much more so, then, the common citizens on the state register.

昔者越王句践困于会稽之上，乃用范蠡、计然。
当年越王句践被吴兵围困在会稽山上，他就采用了范蠡、计然的谋略。
When King Goujian of Yue was in desperate straits on Mount Kuaiji, he followed the advice of Fan Li and Ji Ran.

计然曰：“知斗则修备，时用则知物，二者形则万货之情可得而观已。”
计然说：“懂得战斗的人总是平时就做好准备；要想到时候用起来顺手，平时就得了解这些东西的性能。明白这两种道理，那各种事物的规律就都能看清了。”
Ji Ran said, “One who knows how to compete prepares in advance; one who understands seasonal needs knows commodities; and a grasp of these two things enables him to understand the whole market.”

故岁在金，穰；水，毁；木，饥；火，旱。
岁星运行到西方的时候，这年就要丰收；岁星运行到北方的时候，这年就没有收成；岁星运行到东方的时候，这年就歉收；岁星运行到南方的时候，这年就会大旱。
Each year is dominated by an element. Metal means a good harvest, water a flood, wood a crop failure, and fire a drought.

旱则资舟，水则资车，物之理也。
干旱的年头要事先准备船，闹大水的年头应该及早准备车，世上的道理就是如此。
In time of drought, invest in boats; in time of flood, invest in carriages. This is the principle to follow.

六岁穰，六岁旱，十二岁一大饥。
六年丰收，接着就会有六年干旱，十二年准备闹一回大饥荒。
Every six years there will be a good harvest, every six years a drought, every twelve years a great famine.

夫粜，二十病农，九十病末。末病则财不出，农病则草不辟矣。
说到粮食的价钱，如果降到二十那就要伤农，如果涨到九十那就对商人不利。商人如果不利那他们就不买了，同样如果总是伤农那农夫也就不干活了。
When the price of grain is too low, the farmers suffer; when it is too high, the merchants and artisans suffer. When the merchants and artisans suffer, wealth is not forthcoming; when the farmers suffer, they stop weeding the fields.

上不过八十，下不减三十，则农末俱利，平粜齐物，关市不乏，治国之道也。
所以粮价最贵不能高过八十，最贱不能低于三十，这样对农人商人都有利。调整物价维持物价的稳定，使市场上的货物充足，让税务部门也能有很好的收入，这是治国有方的表现。
If the price of grain is neither too high nor too low, farmers and merchants and artisans will all profit. The right way to govern is to keep the price of grain steady so that there is no lack of goods and no shortage of taxes.

积著之理，务完物，无息币。
商人储存货物，一定要买好的，不要在手里放着很多的钱。
The way to accumulate wealth is to produce goods and not let money stay idle.

以物相贸，易腐败而食之货勿留，无敢居贵。
要及时地买入卖出，坏了的东西一定不能再留，不要总希望涨价按着东西不出手。
Let there be an exchange of goods. Do not store up perishable commodities, or go in for those which are costly.

论其有余不足，则知贵贱。
弄清了市场上缺什么多什么，就知道什么东西要贵什么东西要贱了。
By noting surpluses and shortages, you can tell what will be expensive and what cheap.

贵上极则反贱，贱下极则反贵。
一种东西的价格贵到了顶点就要变贱，一种东西的价格贱到了极点也就会变贵。
When prices rise too high, they must fall again; when prices fall too low, they will rise again.

贵出如粪土，贱取如珠玉。
当价格变贵时，手里的东西要像粪土一样地及时抛出；当物价变贱的时候，对别人的东西要像珍宝一样地及时买入。
When things are expensive, sell them off as if they were dirt, and buy up cheap goods as though they were jewels.

财币欲其行如流水。
要使货币像流水一样地流通起来。
Money should circulate like flowing water."

修之十年，国富，厚赂战士，士赴矢石，如渴得饮，遂报强吴，观兵中国，称号“五霸”。
就这样越王实行了十年，国家就富起来了，他用重赏奖励士兵，使士兵们冲锋陷阵像渴极了找水喝一样地勇敢自觉，于是很快地灭掉了吴国，并出兵向中原国家示威，最终成了“五霸”中的一霸。
After King Goujian had observed these rules for ten years, his kingdom was so rich and his soldiers so well rewarded that they charged against arrows and stones like thirsty men rushing to drink. Then he took his revenge on the powerful state of Wu, demonstrated the might of his arms throughout the land and became one of the Five Overlords.

范蠡既雪会稽之耻，乃喟然而叹曰：“计然之策七，越用其五而得意。既已施于国，吾欲用之家。”
范蠡帮着句践洗刷了会稽受困的耻辱后，深有感慨地叹息说：“计然当年提出七条建议，越王只用了五条就成了霸主，他已经把它用在了治国上，我今后将要把它用在发家上。”
After the disgrace of Kuaiji was wiped out, Fan Li sighed and said, "By using five of Ji Ran's seven precepts, Yue gained its ends. They have been applied in our state, and now I shall try them out for the benefit of my own family."

乃乘扁舟浮于江湖，变名易姓，适齐为鸱夷子皮，之陶为朱公。
于是他便离开越国，乘着小船改名换姓到江湖上漫游了。他到了齐国改名为鸱夷子皮，他到了宋国的陶邑，就说自己姓朱。
He sailed in a small boat down rivers and across lakes and, having changed his name, went to Qi, where he was known as Zhiyi Zipi, the Old Wine-skin. Then he went to Tao, where he was known as Lord Zhu.

朱公以为陶天下之中，诸侯四通，货物所交易也。
他认为陶邑地处天下之中，四通八达，是个从事贸易的好地方。
Observing that Tao, at the hub of the realm, was a centre of communications and of barter.

乃治产积居，与时逐而不责于人。故善治生者，能释人而任时。
于是他便在这里采买储存货物，看准时机买进卖出。一个善于做买卖的人，不要眼睛盯着人，而关键是要把握住时机。
He acquired land property there, stored up commodities, and made a profit by biding his time without much exertion. He was a good manager, a sound judge of men, able to take advantage of the times.

十九年之中三致千金，再分散与贫交疏昆弟。此所谓富好行其德者也。
就这样他在十九年中先后三次把家产积累到了千金之多，而每次当他一富起来又总是马上把这些财产分给他的那些穷困的亲戚和朋友，这大概就是人们常说的那种“富人容易做好事”吧！
Three times in nineteen years he accumulated a thousand pieces of gold, and twice divided these between distant relatives and those in want. He was, in fact, a rich philanthropist.

后年衰老而听子孙，子孙修业而息之，遂至巨万。故言富者皆称陶朱公。
后来范蠡老了，就放手让他的孩子们干，他的孩子们继承着他的事业从事贸易活动，发展得家产上了亿，所以人们一提到富豪就总是要提“陶朱公”。
Later, when he grew old and infirm, he turned over his affairs to his sons and grandsons, who carried on and developed his business until they had millions. Thus Lord Zhu of Tao became a byword for a rich man.

子赣既学于仲尼，退而仕于卫，废著鬻财于曹、鲁之间，七十子之徒，赐最为饶益。
子贡跟着孔子学成以后，回来在卫国做官，他囤积货物，在曹国、鲁国之间做买卖，孔子的七十多个著名学生中，数子贡最富有。
Zigong, after studying with Confucius, went to hold office in Wei. He made money by buying cheap and selling dear in the region of Cao and Lu. Of the seventy disciples of Confucius, he was the richest.

原宪不厌糟糠，匿于穷巷。
原宪穷得连糟糠都吃不饱，住在一条偏僻的小胡同里。
While Yuan Xian had not even husks enough to fill his belly and lived hidden in a wretched lane.

子贡结驷连骑，束帛之币以聘享诸侯，所至，国君无不分庭与之抗礼。
而子贡则是高车大马前呼后拥地出入于各国诸侯的门庭，他每到一处，那些诸侯都把他奉为上宾。
Zigong travelled in a carriage drawn by four horses with an escort of riders bearing rolls of silk to present to the rulers of states. And wherever he went, the ruler received him as an equal.

夫使孔子名布扬于天下者，子贡先后之也。此所谓得势而益彰者乎？
孔子为什么能够名扬天下呢，这完全是子贡给他活动的结果。这大概就是人们所说的那种“势力越大而名声越响”吧！
Indeed, it was thanks to Zigong that the fame of Confucius spread—a clear case of power increasing reputation.

白圭，周人也。
白圭是周国人。
Bai Gui, a native of Zhou.

当魏文侯时,李克务尽地力,而白圭乐观时变,故人弃我取，人取我与。
魏文侯时代，李克提倡发展农业充分利用土地条件，而白圭则是注意观测时机，人家不要的东西他大量购入，人家抢着买的东西他大量抛出。
lived during the time of Marquis Wen of Wei, when Li Ke was utilizing the land to the full. Bai Gui, however, enjoyed looking out for seasonal changes. What others spurned he took, what others sought he supplied.

夫岁孰取谷，予之丝漆；茧出取帛絮，予之食。
丰收的年头他买进谷物，卖出丝、漆；而蚕丝上市的季节他就大量收购蚕丝，抛出粮食。
At harvest time he bought in grain and sold silk and lacquer, when cocoons came on the market he bought in raw silk and sold grain.

太阴在卯，穰；明岁衰恶。
岁星运行到卯时，五谷丰登，第二年必定有灾荒；
When the Primal Female Principle is in the sign of Cancer there will be a good harvest, but a bad one the following year.

至午，旱；明岁美。
岁星运行到午时，天气干旱，第二年一定丰收；
When it is in the sign of Libra there will be a drought, but a good harvest the next year.

至酉，穰；明岁衰恶。
岁星运行到酉时，年景丰收，第二年一定有灾；
When it is in the sign of Capricorn,a good harvest will be followed by a failure the next year.

至子，大旱；明岁美，有水。
岁星运行到子时，天下大旱，第二年一定风调雨顺，雨水多。
When it is in the sign of Aries, there will be a serious drought followed by a good crop but also a flood the next year.

至卯，积著率岁倍。
岁星运行到卯时，如果囤积货物一年之间利润必能翻一番。
When it returns to the sign of Cancer, the yearly store of grain will be doubled.

欲长钱，取下谷;长石斗，取上种。
要是想赚钱，囤积谷物他就囤积下等的；要是想提高产量，他买种子就要买上等的。
When he wanted more money, he bought inferior grain; when he wanted to increase his stock, he bought good seeds.

能薄饮食，忍嗜欲，节衣服，与用事僮仆同苦乐，趋时若猛兽鸷鸟之发。
他能节衣缩食，与自己家的奴仆同甘苦。当他发现赚钱的时机一到，他就会像苍鹰猛虎一样立即扑上去。
He spent little on food and drink, curbing his appetite and sharing the hardships and pleasures of his slaves,but seizing on any chance of gain as fiercely as some wild beast or bird of prey.

故曰：“吾治生产，犹伊尹、吕尚之谋，孙吴用兵，商鞅行法是也”。
他说：“我做买卖，就像伊尹、姜太公一样有计谋，就如孙膑、吴起一样善于决断，还能像商鞅执法一样说到做到。
He said, "I do business in the same way that Yi Yin and Lü Shang planned their policies, Sun Zi and Wu Qi made war, and Lord Shang applied the law.

是故其智不足与权变,勇不足以决断，仁不能以取予,强不能有所守,虽欲学吾术，终不告之矣。”
因此有些人其智慧不能随机应变，其勇敢不能当机立断，其仁爱不能合适地决定取舍，其刚强不能坚持原则，这种人即使想跟着我学习，我也不会教给他。”
If men lack the intelligence to change with the times, the courage to make quick decisions, the magnanimity to give things away and the strength to hold what they have, though they want to learn my art I will not teach them.”

盖天下言治生祖白圭。
天下人凡是做买卖的都以白圭为祖师爷。
So all the world knows Bai Gui as the father of business management.

白圭其有所试矣,能试有所长，非苟而已也。
白圭所讲的都是经过实践检验的，检验后确实有其长处，绝不是一般地说说而已。
He set a standard for those who wanted to learn from him,and accepted only those who came up to this standard. He did not teach everyone.

猗顿用篮盐起。而邯郸郭纵以铁冶成业,与王者埒富。
猗顿是靠着炼池盐发家的，邯郸的郭纵是靠着炼铁发家的，他们的财富都多得可以和国王相比。
Yi Dun prospered because of his salt ponds and Guo Zong of Handan made a fortune in iron smelting. Both were as wealthy as any prince.

乌氏倮畜牧,及众，斥卖,求奇绘物,间献遗戎王。
乌氏倮以畜牧为业，当牲畜繁殖得多了，他就把它们出卖，而采购进一批美丽的丝绸，偷偷地运出境外去送给戎王，
Then there was Luo of Wushi who raised livestock. When his herd had multiplied, he sold it to buy rare objects and coloured silk as presents for the king of the western tribes,

戎王什倍其偿，与之畜，畜至用谷量马牛。
戎王给他十倍的价钱，以牲畜支付，所得的牛马乃至以山谷相量。
who repaid him tenfold, giving him so many herds that he reckoned his cattle and horses by the valleyful.

秦始皇帝令倮比封君,以时与列臣朝请。
秦始皇让乌氏倮享受诸侯的待遇，让他能定时与其他大臣们一道进京拜见皇帝。
The First Emperor of Qin made him equal in status to a prince and allowed him to pay homage at court in spring and autumn with the ministers.

而巴寡妇清,其先得丹穴,而擅其利数世，家亦不訾。
巴郡有个寡妇清，她的先人发现了一个丹穴，从那时起她们家一连几辈子享受这份利益，财产多得无法计算。
There was also the widow named Qing in the region of Ba and Shu,whose family owned a cinnabar mine and had monopolized the profit for several generations, so that her wealth was past counting.

清，寡妇也，能守其业，用财自卫，不见侵犯。
作为一个寡妇，她能守着自己的家业，用钱财来保卫自己，不受外力侵犯。
Although only a widow, she knew how to hold on to her property and used her wealth to protect herself so that nobody could molest her.

秦皇帝以为贞妇而客之,为筑女怀清台。
秦始皇认为她是一位贞洁女子而对她以客礼相待，为她建筑了一座“怀清台”。
The First Emperor of Qin treated her as a protegee and built the Tower of Nühuaiqing to honour her chastity.

夫倮鄙人牧长,清穷乡寡妇，礼抗万乘，名显天下，岂非以富邪?
乌氏倮是边境地区的一个牧民头领，寡妇清是一个穷乡的寡妇，居然都能让天子对他们以客礼相待，名闻天下，这难道不就是因为他们有钱吗?
Luo was only a rustic herdsman and Qing a widow in a poor district, yet both were treated with as much respect as the rulers of a state with ten thousand chariots, while their fame spread throughout the empire. Was this not on account of their wealth?

汉兴，海内为一，开关梁,弛山泽之禁,是以富商大贾周流天下，交易之物莫不通，得其所欲，而徙豪杰诸侯强族于京师。
汉朝建国以后，天下一统，国内取消了各地之间往来的限制，允许人们可以自由地去开发山林湖海，于是商人们积极活动起来，使得各地的货物得以充分流通，而他们自己也大大地赚了钱，正好这时候国家下令把各地的豪绅富户和一些世家大族们迁到京城长安附近去。
After the rise of the Han Dynasty, the whole country was united, passes and bridges were opened, and restrictions on the exploitation of mountains and marshes were abolished. The result was that rich traders and influential merchants travelled all over the empire and goods of every kind circulated wherever men desired, while prominent citizens, nobles and powerful clans were moved to the capital.

关中自汗、雍以东至河、华,膏壤沃野千里，自虞、夏之贡以为上田,而公刘适邠,太王、王季在岐,文王作丰,武王治镐,故其民犹有先王之遗风，好稼穑，殖五谷，地重,重为邪。
关中地区西起汗县、雍县，东到黄河、华山，这其间沃野千里，从虞舜、夏禹以来一直按照上等土地向朝廷进贡，后来周朝的祖先公刘由戎狄地区迁到了邠县，接着太王、王季又迁到了岐山，到周文王时建都于丰，周武王时又迁到了镐，周朝的子民一直保持着他们祖先的传统，他们爱农业，种植五谷，乡土观念较强，不轻易为非作歹。
Within the Hangu Pass, from the Jian and Yong Rivers east to the Yellow River and Mount Huashan, are a thousand li of rich and fertile fields, recognized as excellent land since the times of Emperor Shun and the Xia Dynasty. Gong Liu moved to Bin, Daiwang and Wangji resided in Qi, King Wen built the city of Feng and King Wu ruled from Hao. Thus the people of that region still show traces of the influence of the former kings. They are fond of agriculture, grow the five crops, value their land, and oppose evil practices.

及秦文、德、缪居雍,隙陇蜀之货物而多贾。
待至秦文公、秦德公、秦缪公时代，他们建都于雍，雍县是关中和蜀郡之间的货物集散之地，商人很多。
Later, Duke Wen, Duke Xiao and Duke Mu of Qin had their capital at Yong, which became a centre of commerce for all the products of Long and Shu.

献公徙栎邑,栎邑北卻戎翟，东通三晋，亦多大贾。
待至秦献公上台，秦国迁都到了栎邑，栎邑北靠戎狄，东连魏国，也是个商人很多的地方。
When Duke Xian and Duke Xiao moved the capital to Yueyi, which was safe from the tribesmen of the north and had communications with Han (403B.C.-230B.C.), Wei (403B.C.-225B.C.) and Zhao, this too became a great centre of commerce.

孝、昭治咸阳,因以汉都，长安诸陵,四方辐凑并至而会，地小人众，故其民益玩巧而事末也。
秦孝公、秦昭王建都咸阳，后来汉朝又建都在这一带，因而遂使长安和周围的一些皇帝陵墓所在县成了天下交通的枢纽。这一带地少人多，客观条件就使得这里的百姓们越来越会玩手段地去从事商业活动了。
Since Duke Wu and King Zhao had their capital at Xianyang, while the Han Dynasty capital with its mausoleums was at Chang'an, goods from all directions converged here. Because this region is small and populous, the people here are more ingenious and make a living by secondary occupations.

南则巴蜀。巴蜀亦沃野,地饶卮、姜、丹沙、石、铜、铁、竹、木之器。
关中以南是巴蜀，巴蜀也有广阔的肥沃土地，而盛产卮、姜、丹砂、石、铜、铁以及竹、木制造的器具。
To the south are Ba and Shu, another fertile region, rich in safflower, ginger, cinnabar, stone, copper, iron and utensils of bamboo and wood.

南御滇棘，棘僮。
巴蜀南接滇越国爽道，有僰族的人口被劫掠来卖。
In the south Ba and Shu control Dian and Bo, the latter known for its slaves.

西近邛笮,笮马、旄牛。
巴蜀又西接邛都、笮都，因而有人往来贩卖笮马旄牛。
To their west lie Qiong and Ze, the latter noted for its horses and yaks.

然四塞，栈道千里，无所不通，唯褒斜绾毂其口,以所多易所鲜。
巴蜀四面有山，但因为山中有栈道，所以也四通八达，而褒斜道是巴蜀通往北方的咽喉，巴蜀人民常常通过这条道路把自己多余的东西卖出去，把自己所需要的东西买进来。
Ba and Shu have natural barriers on four sides, but plank roads extend a thousand li through the mountains, communicating with all parts of the country, while they all meet at the Baoye Defile where men can barter surplus goods for what they lack.

天水、陇西、北地、上郡与关中同俗，然西有羌中之利,北有戎翟之畜，畜牧为天下饶。
天水、陇西、北地、上郡这一带，和关中地区风俗相同。向西它可以和羌族做买卖，向北可以买到戎狄的牲畜，因此这里的牲畜，比全国其他地区都多；
The provinces of Tianshui, LongXi, Beidi and Shangjun follow the same customs as the area within the Passes; but with the resources of the Qiang tribesmen in the west and the cattle of the Rong and Di tribes in the north, these provinces have more herds than any other part of the empire.

然地亦穷险，唯京师要其道。
缺点是土地比较贫瘠。长安正在它通往东方的道路上。
This region is mountainous and inaccessible, in communication with the capital only.

故关中之地，于天下三分之一，而人众不过什三；然量其富，什居其六。
总括以上关中地区，这里的地盘占全国的三分之一，而人口还不到十分之三，但这里所集中的财富，却占到了全国的十分之六。
Thus the area within the Pass makes up one-third of the territory of the empire, with three-tenths of the population; yet its wealth amounts to three-fifths of the whole.

昔唐人都河东,殷人都河内,周人都河南。夫三河在天下之中,若鼎足，王者所更居也，建国各数百千岁,土地小狭，民人众，都国诸侯所聚会,故其俗纤俭习事。
唐尧曾建都于河东地区，商朝人建都于河内地区，周朝人建都于河南。这河东、河内、河南三郡，三足鼎立于天下之中，是历代帝王交替建都的地方，每个朝代都存在了几百年到上千年，这里土地狭小，人口众多，而且其中还夹杂着许多诸侯小国，所以这里的民风俭朴，善于经营。
In the old days, Emperor Yao had his capital east of the Yellow River; the Shang capital was north of the river bend; and the Zhou capital was south of the Yellow River. These three parts of the empire are like the three feet of a tripod; many kings have established states and capitals there which lasted for centuries. Since these small regions have large populations and the nobles have congregated there, the people are petty-minded, thrifty and worldly.

杨、平阳西贾秦、翟,北贾种、代。种、代，石北也，地边胡，数被寇。人民矜枝,好气，任侠为奸,不事农商。
这个地区可以通过杨县、平阳县向西方的关中以及狄人做买卖，向北可以和种邑、代县作买卖。种邑、代县都在石邑县以北，与匈奴人相邻，经常受到匈奴人的侵扰，因此这里的人民讲究侠义，任性好斗，不愿从事农业商业活动。
Yang and Pingyang trade with Qin and Di in the west and with Zhong and Dai in the north, further north than Shi. They lie next to the Huns, who often attack them. So the people here are bold, stubborn, adventurous and unruly, not given to farming or trading.

然迫近北夷，师旅亟往，中国委输时有奇羡。其民羯羰不均,自全晋之时固已患其傈悍，而武灵王益厉之,其谣俗犹有赵之风也。
但由于这一带地处前线，经常出兵，从内地运来的物资经常会有些剩余，从而使这里的人民受益。这里的人们桀骜不驯，早在春秋时代的晋国时别国就怕他们的骠悍，到战国时代的赵武灵王就越发变本加厉了，以至于直到今天那里还有着当年赵国的风气。
Because these districts are so close to the northern barbarians, troops have often been sent there and goods from the interior have been taken there in large quantities. The strain is very mixed, and even before Jin was divided into three parts the people were known for their boldness. King Wuling of Zhao encouraged this, and the local customs today still smack of those times.

故杨、平阳陈掾其间,得所欲。
杨县和平阳县的人正是凭借着这种形势进行谋利，常常很容易得手。
The merchants of Yang and Pingyang do business with them and can get what they want from them.

温、轵西贾上党，北贾赵、中山。
温县、轵县西通上党，北通赵国、中山。
Wen and Zhi trade with Shangdang in the west and with Zhao and Zhongshan in the north.

中山地薄人众，犹有沙丘纣淫地余民,民俗惯急,仰机利而食。
中山一带人多地薄，想当年殷纣王建沙丘台在这里吃喝玩乐，至今风气犹存，这里的人们生性急躁，讲究投机谋利。
Zhongshan has poor soil and a large population. Some of the inhabitants of Shaqiu are descended from families already there in the time of wicked King Zhou. The people are hot-tempered and live by their wits.

丈夫相聚游戏，悲歌忙慨，起则相随椎剽,休则掘冢作巧奸冶,多美物，为倡优。
男人们好呼朋唤友，游手好闲，慷慨悲歌，有的去杀人越货，有的去挖坟，或制作一些以假乱真的工艺品。这里的许多美男子好出去当优伶。
Bands of able-bodied men roister together or sing melancholy songs, setting out openly to kill and steal, or secretly robbing graves and minting counterfeit money. They have many fine possessions and can sing and mime.

女子则鼓鸣瑟，站屣，游媚贵富，入后宫，遍诸侯。
而女人们则喜欢弹琴鼓瑟，穿着舞鞋去取悦于贵族富豪之门，这里的美女几乎遍布于各个国家各个王侯的后宫。
The women play clear-sounding lyres, wear pointed slippers and try to bewitch the rich and noble, in the hope of being taken into the palaces of the noble lords all over the country.

然邯郸亦漳、河之间一都会也。北通燕、涿,南有郑、卫。
邯郸是漳水、黄河间的一个重要都市，它北通燕都、涿郡，南接郑、卫两国。
Handan, between the Zhang and the Yellow Rivers, is another important Centre, communicating with Yan and Zhao in the north, with Zheng and Wei (1024B.C.-209B.C.) in the south.

郑、卫俗与赵相类，然近梁、鲁,微重而矜节。
郑、卫两国的风俗和赵国类似。但由于它南接梁、鲁两国，所以这里的人们比较稳重，讲究气节。
The customs of Zheng and Wei are like those of Zhao, except that their proximity to Liang and Lu makes the people more sedate and circumspect.

濮上之邑徙野王,野王好气任侠，卫之风也。
秦兵伐魏，其附庸卫君被迁到了野王，之所以野王一带的人们也重侠义讲气节，就是卫国风气浸染的结果。
Since the capital of Wei was moved from Puyang to Yewang, the men there are bold and adventurous in the tradition of Wei.

夫燕亦勃、碣之间一都会也。南通齐、赵,东北边胡。
燕都是渤海、碣石之间的一个重要城市，它南通齐国、赵国，东北与匈奴接壤。
Yan, between Bohai and Jieshi, is a major centre communicating with Qi and Zhao in the south and bordering on the Huns in the northeast.

上谷至辽东,地踔远,人民希,数被寇，大与赵、代俗相类，而民雕捍少虑,有鱼盐枣栗之饶。
它西起上谷，东至辽东，土地辽阔，人口稀少，这里经常受到匈奴人的侵扰，大致与赵国、代国风俗相同。这里的人们生性骠悍，办事少考虑，好处是这里盛产鱼、盐、枣、栗。
The vast, thinly populated highlands between Shanggu and Liaodong are often raided by tribesmen. The customs resemble those of Zhao and Dai. The people are bold and reckless. Fish, salt, jujubes and chestnuts abound here.

北邻乌桓、夫余,东绾秽貉、朝鲜、真番之利。
这里北接乌桓、夫余等少数民族，东部可以在和秽貉、朝鲜、真番做买卖中获得利益。
On the north the region adjoins the Wuhuan and Fuyu tribes; on the east it does a profitable trade with Huimo, Chaoxian and Zhenpan.

洛阳东贾齐、鲁，南贾梁、楚。故泰山之阳则鲁,其阴则齐。
洛阳向东可与齐、鲁两国做买卖，向南可和梁、楚两国做买卖，泰山的南面是鲁国，泰山的北面是齐国。
Luoyang does business in the east with Qi and Lu, in the south with Liang and Chu. South of Mount Tai is Lu, and north is Qi.

齐带山海,膏壤千里，宜桑麻，人民多文彩布帛鱼盐。
齐国被山海所环抱，中间沃野千里，适合种植桑麻，因此丝绸布帛鱼盐之类对于这里的人们来说都不缺。
Qi, bounded by mountains and the sea, has fertile fields stretching a thousand li, where mulberries and hemp thrive. The people have an abundance of coloured silk, cloth, plain silk, fish and salt.

临蓄亦海岱之间一都会也。其俗宽缓阔达，而足智，好议论,地重，难动摇，怯于众斗,勇于持刺，故多劫人者,大国之风也。
临淄是泰山和大海之间的一个重要都市。这里的人们生性宽厚豁达，有智慧，好谈论，乡土观念深，不轻易出外活动，疆场上作战不很勇敢，但却勇于击刺，所以劫道的不少，这一切都是从春秋战国延续下来的大国风气。
Linzi is an important centre between the sea and Mount Tai. The local people are easy-going, open-minded and intelligent, fond of discussion, stable and not easily shaken. They show cowardice if fighting in a body but courage in single combat, and so there are many brigands. Theirs are the ways of a great kingdom.

其中具五民。
临淄城里居住着士、农、工、商、贾等各行各业的人。
Here all five categories of men are to be found.

而邹、鲁滨洙、泗，犹有周公遗风，俗好儒，备于礼，故其民龊龊。
邹国、鲁国靠着洙水、泗水，至今仍保留周公的遗风，当地风俗喜好儒学，礼仪完备，所以百姓行为拘谨。
Zou and Lu on the banks of the rivers Zhu and Si have kept up the tradition of the duke of Zhou. The people favour the Confucian school, have an elaborate code of etiquette, and are therefore puncilious in their behaviour.

颇有桑麻之业，无林泽之饶。
桑麻种植较为普遍，但没有山林湖泽的丰富物产。
Mulberries and hemp are widely cultivated, but they have no forests or marshes.

地小人众，俭啬，畏罪远邪。
土地少而人口多，百姓节俭吝啬，害怕犯罪而远离邪恶。
Land is scarce and the population dense. Frugal, cautious and afraid of trouble, the people steer clear of evil.

及其衰，好贾趋利，甚于周人。
到了国家衰落之后，百姓喜好经商逐利，比周地的人还厉害。
Since the decline of their state they have taken to trading and become more grasping than the men of Zhou.

夫自鸿沟以东，芒、砀以北，属巨野，此梁、宋也。
从鸿沟以东，芒山、砀山以北，一直连接到巨野泽，这是梁国、宋国的地域。
East of Honggou and extending to Juye north of the Mang and Dang Mountains lie the regions of Liang and Song.

陶、睢阳亦一都会也。
陶县、睢阳也是当地的重要都市。
Tao and Suiyang are important centres here.

昔尧作于成阳，舜渔于雷泽，汤止于亳。
从前尧在成阳活动，舜在雷泽捕鱼，商汤在亳地居住。
In ancient times, Emperor Yao travelled to Chengyang, Emperor Shun fished at Leize and King Tang stayed at Bo.

其俗犹有先王遗风，重厚多君子，好稼穑，虽无山川之饶，能恶衣食，致其蓄藏。
当地风俗仍有古代先王的遗风，百姓朴实厚道，君子众多，喜好农耕；虽然没有山川带来的富饶物产，却能节衣缩食，积累财富。
hence the tradition of these former rulers is maintained. The people are generous, gentlemen are numerous, and farming is their favourite occupation. Although they lack rich mountains and rivers, the people accumulate wealth by spending little on their food and clothing.

越楚则有三俗。
越国、楚国的风俗可分为三个区域。
Three different traditions prevail in Yue and Chu.

夫自淮北沛、陈、汝南、南郡，此西楚也。
从淮河以北的沛郡、陈郡、汝南郡、南郡，这是西楚地区。
From the River Huai north to Pei, Chen, Runan and Nanjun, is the western Chu region.

其俗剽轻，易发怒，地薄，寡于积聚。
当地风俗剽悍轻躁，百姓容易发怒，土地贫瘠，财富积累较少。
Its people are impetuous and easily moved to anger. The land is poor with little store of wealth.

江陵故郢都，西通巫、巴，东有云梦之饶。
江陵是过去楚国的郢都，向西连通巫山、巴郡，向东有云梦泽的富饶物产。
Jiangling, on the site of the old Chu capital Ying, communicates with Wu and Ba in the west while to its east are the rich Yunmeng marshes.

陈在楚夏之交，通鱼盐之货，其民多贾。
陈郡位于楚国与中原地区的交界，流通鱼盐等货物，当地百姓多经商。
Chen, between Chu and Xia, trades in fish and salt, and most of its people are merchants.

徐、僮、取虑，则清刻，矜已诺。
徐县、僮县、取虑县一带的百姓，品行廉洁严苛，重视自己的承诺。
The men of Xu, Tong and Qulü are honest and keep their word.

彭城以东，东海、吴、广陵，此东楚也。
彭城以东，包括东海郡、吴郡、广陵郡，这是东楚地区。
From Pengcheng east to Donghai, Wu and Guangling is the region of eastern Chu.

其俗类徐、僮。
当地风俗与徐县、僮县相近。
with customs similar to those of Xu and Tong.

朐、缯以北，俗则齐。
朐县、缯县以北，风俗接近齐国。
The people north of Ju and Zeng follow the customs of Qi.

浙江南则越。
浙江以南，风俗接近越国。
South of the River Zhe the customs resemble those of ancient Yue.

夫吴自阖庐、春申、王濞三人招致天下之喜游子弟，东有海盐之饶，鄣山之铜，三江、五湖之利，亦江东一都会也。
吴国自阖庐、春申君、吴王刘濞三人招揽天下喜好游历的子弟以来，东面有海盐的收益，鄣山的铜矿，以及三江、五湖的水利之便，吴县也是江东的重要都市。
Ever since King Helü, Lord Chunshen and Prince Bi of Wu invited wandering scholars from all parts to Wu, this region with salt from the sea in the east, the copper mines of Mount Zhang and the advantages of three rivers and five lakes, has become an important centre in the east Yangtse Valley.

衡山、九江、江南豫章、长沙，是南楚也，其俗大类西楚。
衡山郡、九江郡，以及长江以南的豫章郡、长沙郡，这是南楚地区，当地风俗大致与西楚相近。
Southern Chu comprises Hengshan, Jiujiang, Jiangnan, Yuzhang and Changsha, and the customs are similar to those of western Chu.

郢之后徙寿春，亦一都会也。
楚国后来把都城迁到寿春，寿春也是一处重要都市。
Shouchun, where the Chu capital was moved from Ying, is also an important centre.

而合肥受南北潮，皮革、鲍、木输会也。
合肥地处南北水路交汇之地，是皮革、干鱼、木材的运输集散地。
The district of Hefei has waterways in the south and north and is a centre for the shipping of hides and leather, salted fish and timber.

与闽中、干越杂俗，故南楚好辞，巧说少信。
因与闽中、干越的风俗相互交融，所以南楚百姓喜好言辞，善于辩说却少有信用。
It shares some of the customs of Minzhong and Yuyue. The men of southern Chu are eloquent speakers but not too reliable.

江南卑湿，丈夫早夭，多竹木。
江南地区地势低洼潮湿，男子大多寿命较短，盛产竹子和木材。
Jiangnan is low and damp and men die early there, but bamboo and wood abound.

豫章出黄金，长沙出连、锡，然堇堇物之所有，取之不足以更费。
豫章郡出产黄金，长沙郡出产铅、锡，但这些物产储量很少，开采所得还不够抵消开采的费用。
Yuzhang produces gold, Changsha tin and lead. The output is too little, however, to cover the cost of mining.

九疑、苍梧以南至儋耳者，与江南大同俗，而杨越多焉。
从九疑山、苍梧郡以南到儋耳郡一带，风俗与江南地区大致相同，且更多保留杨越的风俗。
From Jiuyi and Cangwu south to Zhaner, the customs are similar to those of Jiangnan, particularly as regards the people of Yangyue.

番禺亦其一都会也，珠玑、犀、玳瑁、果、布之凑。
番禺也是当地的重要都市，是珍珠、犀角、玳瑁、水果、布匹的汇聚之地。
Panyu is an important centre with its pearls, rhinoceros horn, tortoise shell, fruit and cloth.

颍川、南阳，夏人之居也。
颍川郡、南阳郡，是古代夏人的居住地。
Yingchuan and Nanyang were the home of the Xia Dynasty.

夏人政尚忠朴，犹有先王之遗风。
夏人治理政事崇尚忠厚朴实，当地仍保留先王的遗风。
and the people are known for their honesty and simplicity, a relic of the old Xia tradition.

颍川敦愿。
颍川百姓忠厚老实。
The men of Yingchuan are honest and law-abiding.

秦末世，迁不轨之民于南阳。
秦朝末年，曾将不守法度的百姓迁徙到南阳。
Towards the end of the Qin Dynasty law-breakers were sent to Nanyang.

南阳西通武关、郧关，东南受汉、江、淮。
南阳向西连通武关、郧关，东南面接纳汉水、长江、淮河的水运。
which communicates with the Wu and Yun Passes and with the Han, Yangtse and Huai Rivers in the southeast.

宛亦一都会也。
宛城也是一处重要都市。
Wan is another important city.

俗杂好事，业多贾。
当地风俗繁杂，百姓喜好经营事务，从事商业的人很多。
Its customs are mixed. The people are enterprising and among them are many merchants.

其任侠，交通颍川，故至今谓之“夏人”。
当地百姓崇尚侠义，与颍川郡交往密切，所以至今仍被称作“夏人”。
and gallant men; there are direct communications with Yingchuan. The people of this district have always been known as men of Xia.

夫天下物所鲜所多，人民谣俗，山东食海盐，山西食盐卤，领南、沙北固往往出盐，大体如此矣。
天下各地物产的多少、百姓的风俗：山东地区吃海盐，山西地区吃池盐，岭南、沙漠以北地区也常常出产盐，大致情况就是这样。
That is a general picture of the distribution of products and the local customs in different parts of the empire. The people east of the mountains use salt extracted from the sea, those west of the mountains use rock salt, while south of the Five Mountain Ranges and north of the desert they produce some salt as well.

总之，楚越之地，地广人希，饭稻羹鱼，或火耕而水耨，果隋赢蛤，不待贾而足，地势饶食，无饥馑之患，以故窳偷生，无积聚而多贫。
总的来说，楚越地区土地广阔而人口稀少，百姓以米饭、鱼肉为食，有的地方采用火耕水耨的耕作方式；水果、蚌类等物产丰富，无需依靠经商就能自给自足。因当地土地盛产食物，没有饥荒的担忧，所以百姓苟且偷生，家中没有积蓄，大多贫穷。
To sum up, the extensive region of Chu and Yue is sparsely inhabited. The people eat rice and fish, prepare the land for ploughing by burning, cultivate paddy-fields, and have a sufficiency of fruit, gourds and shellfish so that they need not resort to trade. Since there is an abundance of food and no fear of famine, the people are indolent and easy-going. They do not store up wealth and many of them are poor.

是故江、淮以南，无冻饿之人，亦无千金之家。
因此长江、淮河以南地区，没有受冻挨饿的人，也没有积累千金的富裕人家。
As a result, south of the Huai and Yangtse Rivers no one suffers from cold or hunger, but neither are there very wealthy families.

沂、泗水以北，宜五谷桑麻六畜，地小人众，数被水旱之害，民好畜藏，故秦、夏、梁、鲁好农而重民。
沂水、泗水以北地区，适合种植五谷、桑麻，饲养六畜；土地少而人口多，多次遭受水旱灾害，百姓喜好积蓄储存。所以秦地、夏地、梁国、鲁国一带的人喜好农业，重视百姓。
North of the Yi and Si Rivers, the land is suitable for grain, mulberries, hemp and livestock. The area is not large but densely populated and, owing to the frequency of floods and drought, the people store up provisions. Hence in Qin, Xia, Liang and Lu attention is paid to agriculture and most of the people are farmers.

三河、宛、陈亦然，加以商贾。
三河地区、宛城、陈郡也是如此，此外还发展商业。
The same is true of Sanhe, Wan and Chen, although the people also engage in trade.

齐、赵设智巧，仰机利。
齐国、赵国的人施展智谋技巧，依靠投机取利谋生。
The people of Qi and Zhao are shrewd and resourceful and live by their wits.

燕、代田畜而事蚕。
燕国、代郡的人以耕田、放牧和养蚕为业。
while those of Yan and Dai make a living by farming, cattlebreeding and sericulture.

由此观之，贤人深谋于廊庙，论议朝廷，守信死节隐居岩穴之士设为名高者安归乎？归于富厚也。
由此我们可以明白，达官贵人们在庙堂上运筹决策，在朝廷上讨论国家大政，而死守节义的隐士们则隐居深山追求高名，他们的根本目的在哪里呢？归根结底还都是为了富贵为了钱。
From this one thing becomes clear. For what purpose do able men try to plan ahead in affairs of state, dispute with each other at court, abide by their word and die for their principles? For what purpose do hermits in mountain caves try by every means to win fame? Their aim is wealth and comfort.

是以廉吏久，久更富，廉贾归富。
为官清廉就可以长久地做下去，做的时间长了得的实际利益就会更多，做商人也是这个道理，越是不贪心的就最后赚钱更多。
So honest officials, remaining long at their posts, get rich in the end. Honest merchants, too, become wealthy.

富者，人之情性，所不学而俱欲者也。
爱钱是人们的本性，不用学就会。
Wealth is something all men desire instinctively without having to be taught.

故壮士在军，攻城先登，陷阵却敌，斩将搴旗，前蒙矢石，不避汤火之难者，为重赏使也。
士兵们冲锋陷阵，斩将拔旗，冒着枪林箭雨前进，不怕牺牲，不就是为了重赏吗？
Brave soldiers scale a city wall ahead of their fellows, break through enemy lines, throw back the foe, kill his general, capture his flag and brave arrows, stones, boiling water and flames, all because of the prospect of a rich reward.

其在闾巷少年，攻剽椎埋，劫人作奸，掘冢铸币，任侠并兼，借交报仇，篡逐幽隐，不避法禁，走死地如骛者，其实皆为财用耳。
那些流氓子弟，杀人劫道，为非作歹，挖坟墓造假钱，拉帮结派，互为生死，明抢暗夺，硬往法网里钻，往死路上跑，说到底不都是为了钱吗？
Young men from the byways set on passers-by and rob them, murder men and bury their bodies, kidnap people and plunder them, rob graves, coin counterfeit money, become local despots, seize property, carry out personal vendettas and do dark and secret deeds, defying all laws and prohibitions and rushing headlong into danger—they do all this for the sake of money too.

今夫赵女郑姬，设形容，楔鸣琴，揄长袂，蹑利屣，目挑心招，出不远千里，不择老少者，奔富厚也。
赵地郑地的美女们，梳妆打扮，鼓瑟弹琴，穿着漂亮的衣服鞋子，不远千里地去勾引人，年老年少不挑拣，不也是为了钱吗？
The girls of Zhao and Zheng paint their faces, play clear lyres, flutter their long sleeves, mince about in pointed slippers, make eyes at men, flirt, and will gladly go a thousand li to find a lover regardless of his age, because they are after wealth and comfort too.

游闲公子，饰冠剑，连车骑，亦为富贵容也。
一些大家子弟，衣帽披挂光鲜，高车大马前呼后拥地到处奔走，不也是为了追求富贵吗？
Idle young nobles wear splendid hats and swords and keep carriages and retinues of riders, to flaunt their riches and rank.

弋射渔猎，犯晨夜，冒霜雪，驰坑谷，不避猛兽之害，为得味也。
那些捕鱼打猎的，起五更睡半夜，冒着风雪严寒，不怕地形危险，不怕野兽咬伤，不就是想得到他们想吃的东西吗？
Some go hunting, shooting or fishing morning and night, braving frost and snow and riding through valleys where wild beasts may spring out at them, so eager are they to get game.

博戏驰逐，斗鸡走狗，作色相矜，必争胜者，重失负也。
赌博赛马，斗鸡走狗，面红耳赤地急着想赢，不就是怕输钱吗？
Gamblers and those who bet on horses, cock-fights and hounds grow angry or boastful and insist on winning, so reluctant are they to lose their wagers.

医方诸食技术之人，焦神极能，为重精也。
医生以及各种手艺人，他们花心思钻研技术，是为了得到更多的酬金呀！
Men who devote all their skill and energy to medicine, cooking or other arts, do so for the sake of handsome payment.

吏士舞文弄法，刻章伪书，不避刀锯之诛者，没于赂遗也。
刀笔吏们不怕杀头地舞文弄法，刻假图章，伪造笔迹，是为了得到贿赂呀！
Clerks who juggle with phrases twist the law, fake seals and forge signatures at the risk of decapitation or being sawn asunder, do so because they have been bribed.

农工商贾畜长，固求富益货也。
农人、工人、商人们生产储存货物，是为让财产越来越多呀！
In the same way, peasants, artisans, merchants and cattle-breeders seek wealth and an increase of their possessions.

此有知尽能索耳，终不余力而让财矣。
这些人都是在竭尽一切心思地干，谁也不会留着劲头不用，谁也不想把钱财让给别人。
Men of any intelligence spare no effort and will stop at nothing to achieve this, never letting slip a chance to make money.

谚曰：“百里不贩樵，千里不贩来。”
俗话说：“没有到百里之外去卖柴的，没有到千里之外去卖粮的。”
There is a maxim: “Don't go a hundred li to sell firewood. Don't go a thousand li to deal in grain."

居之一岁，种之以谷；十岁，树之以木；百岁，来之以德。德者，人物之谓也。
如果在某地住一年，那就种粮食；如果准备住十年，那就可以种树木；如果想住一辈子，那就得讲人缘，就得以道德声望来感化吸引人了。什么叫道德呢？道德实际是指你手下有人有钱。
If you are to be in a place for one year, sow grain; if for ten years, plant trees; if for a hundred years, rely on virtue—in other words on personal prestige.

今有无秩禄之奉，爵邑之入，而乐与之比者，命曰“素封”。
有些人虽然没有爵位俸禄，但他们实际的享受可以和有爵位俸禄的人相比，这种情况就是通常所说的“素封”。
There are men with no government stipends, no revenue from fiefs, who live as well as if they had these things and are called “nobles without titles".

封者食租税，岁率户二百。千户之君则二十万，朝觐聘享出其中。
有爵位的人们靠着吃领地上的租税，每年一户大约出二百钱。这样，一个享有千户的封君才只能得二十万，而他们进京上朝的一切花销还都在这里头。
An enfeoffed noble lives off taxes and levies an average of two hundred cash a year from each household. Thus the lord of a thousand households has an annual income of two hundred thousand cash, out of which he has to cover the expenses of his visits to court to pay homage, his gifts to other nobles and his sacrifices.

庶民农工商贾，率亦岁万息二千，百万之家则二十万，而更徭租赋出其中。衣食之欲，恣所好美矣。
平民百姓中的农人、工人、商人，有本钱一万的，大体也可以得到二千文的利息，那么一个本钱百万的家庭一年也可以收入二十万了，当然这里头也要拿出一些去交租税和劳役的费用，但他们吃穿方面的各种欲望，都可以得到满足。
Common people such as farmers, artisans and merchants, who have ten thousand cash, can get a yearly interest of two thousand. This means that families with a million cash will also have an income of two hundred thousand, enough to buy themselves off conscript service, pay taxes and duties and still get all the fine clothes and food they want.

故曰陆地牧马二百蹄，牛蹄角千四，千足羊，泽中千足彘，水居千石鱼陂，山居千章之材。
所以说凡能在陆地上放牧五十匹马，一百头牛，二百五十头羊，或是在草泽养二百五十口猪，在水塘里养十二万斤鱼，在山上种一千棵树——
Thus it is said that a man's income equals that of a marquis with a fief of a thousand households if he has any of the following: pastures with fifty horses or a hundred and sixty-seven oxen, or two hundred and fifty sheep; swamps with two hundred and fifty pigs; ponds stocked with a thousand piculs of fish; hills bearing a thousand timber trees;

安邑千树枣；燕、秦千树栗；蜀、汉、江陵千树橘；淮北、常山已南，河、济之间千树荻；陈、夏千亩漆；齐、鲁千亩桑麻；渭川千亩竹；
安邑地区的一千棵枣树；燕、秦地区的一千棵栗树；蜀、汉、江陵地区的一千棵橘树；淮北、常山以南，黄河、济水之间的一千棵楸树；陈郡、颍川一带的一千亩漆树；齐、鲁地区的一千亩桑麻；渭水流域的一千亩竹子；
a thousand jujube trees in Anyi; a thousand chestnut trees in Yan or Qin; a thousand tangerine trees in Shu, Han or Jiangling; a thousand catalpas north of the Huai River, south of Changshan, or between the Yellow and Ji Rivers; a thousand mu of lacquer trees in Chen or Xia; a thousand mu of mulberries or hemp in Qi And Lu; a thousand mu of bamboos in Weichuan;

及名国万家之城，带郭千亩亩钟之田，若千亩卮茜，千畦姜韭：此其人皆与千户侯等。
以及一个万户居民的大城市郊区的一千亩亩产千钟粮食的土地；或是种植一千亩栀子茜草，外带一千亩生姜韭菜——那么这些人的收入都会和一个千户侯相等。
a thousand mu of land producing sixty-four pecks a mu in the vicinity of cities with ten thousand households in big provinces; a thousand mu of safflower; a thousand plots of ginger or scallion.

然是富给之资也，不窥市井，不行异邑，坐而待收，身有处士之义而取给焉。
这是一种获得富足的来源，这些人用不着到市场上去奔波，也用不着去异乡异地，他们就是坐在那里等候收成，既有隐士之名，家里又很富裕。
Such men do not have to go to market or travel to other districts, but can sit at home waiting for the harvest, living as private gentlemen of means.

若至家贫亲老，妻子软弱，岁时无以祭祀进醵，饮食被服不足以自通，如此不惭耻，则无所比矣。
如果有的人把自家搞得很穷，双亲年老无法奉养，老婆孩子生活困难，过年过节连个祭祀会餐的钱都没有，平时连吃穿用度都混不上，这样的人如果还不自知惭愧，那可真是不堪一提了。
As for those paupers with old parents and an ailing wife and children who are not ashamed of being unable to sacrifice at the right season or to provide entertainment, food, drink, clothing and bedding, such men have no social standing.

是以无财作力，少有斗智，既饶争时，此其大经也。
没钱的人就得干苦力，钱不多的人就得动心眼儿，钱多的人就可以看时机看行情，这是基本规律。
That is why, as a general rule, a man with no money works hard, one with a little money uses his wits, and one who is well off seizes every chance to better himself.

今治生不待危身取给，则贤人勉焉。
作买卖不会有什么危险，而生活就富裕了，所以有本事的人都乐意干。
A good man should exert himself to make a living without waiting till he is in desperate straits.

是故本富为上，末富次之，奸富最下。
以农业致富为上等，以商业致富次之，以奸猾致富最卑鄙。
The best kind of wealth comes from farming, the next best from trade and handicrafts, the worst from evil practices.

无岩处奇士之行，而长贫贱，好语仁义，亦足羞也。
自身倘没有大隐士的操行，长期处于贫困之中，还张口闭口地侈谈“仁义”，这种人也够可耻的。
When, in spite of poverty and lowliness, one who is no hero or gentleman of talent still talks about virtue and justice, he ought to be thoroughly ashamed of himself.

凡编户之民，富相什则卑下之,伯则畏惮之,千则役，万则仆，物之理也。
作为一个贫民百姓，如果别人的财富是他的十倍，那么他见了人家就会低一等；如果人家的财富是他的百倍，那他就要怕人家；如果人家的财富是他的千倍万倍，那他就成了人家的奴仆了，这是自然的道理。
The ordinary citizen will abase himself before one ten times richer than he, fear one a hundred times richer, serve one a thousand times richer, and be the slave of one ten thousand times richer. This is the nature of things.

夫用贫求富农不如工，工不如商，刺绣文不如倚市门,此言末业，贫者之资也。
如果要想由穷变富，当农民不如当工人，当工人不如当商人，在作坊里绣花远不如去市场上卖货。所以说经商是穷人应该干的。
If a poor man wants to become rich, it is better to be an artisan than a farmer, better to be a merchant than an artisan, better to be a vender than work at embroidery. In other words, trade and handicrafts are the best way for a poor man to make money.

通邑大都，酤一岁千瓮,醯酱千巩,浆千甑,屠牛羊彘千皮，贩谷粜千钟，薪稿千车，船长千丈,木千章，竹竿万个,其轺车百乘,牛车千两,木器鬃者千枚,铜器千钧,素木铁器若卮茜千石,马蹄缴千,牛千足，羊彘千双，僮手指千,筋角丹沙千斤，其帛絮细布千钧,文采千匹，榻布皮革千石，漆千斗，蘖魏盐豉千苔,鲐紫千斤,鲰千石，鲍千钧,枣栗千石者三之，狐昭裘千皮“,羔羊裘千石，旃席千具,果菜千种四，子贷金钱千贯,节驵会”,贪贾三之，廉贾五之,此亦比千乘之家，其大率也。
在一个四通八达的都市里，卖一千缸酒，一千缸醋，一千缸酱，屠宰牛羊猪一千只，或者贩卖粮谷一千种，贩卖柴草一千车，贩卖船只一千丈，木材一千棵，竹杆一万根，小车一百辆，牛车一千辆，木制漆器一千件，铜制器具三万斤，木头、铁器或栀子一千石，马二百匹，牛二百五十头，羊、猪两千只，奴隶一百个，筋角丹砂一千斤，丝绸细布三万斤，带花纹的绸子一千匹，粗布皮革十二万斤，漆一千斗，酵母盐酱一千罐，海鱼一千斤，小杂鱼二万斤，干鱼三万斤，枣、栗三十六万斤，狐皮、貂皮一千张，羊羔皮袄十二万斤，毡席一千领，果菜一千种，或放贷的本钱一千贯，或在市场上当经纪人时抽取三分之一或五分之一的佣金，这些收入也都和一个千辆兵车的大夫之家差不多，这是大概情形。
In centres of communications and large cities a man can live like the lord of a thousand chariots if each year he produces a thousand jars of wine, a thousand jars of vinegar or a thousand pots of sauce; if he slaughters a thousand oxen, sheep or pigs;if he sells a thousand zbong³of grain or a thousand cartloads of firewood; if he owns boats ten thousand feet long if set in a line, a thousand logs of timber, ten thousand bamboo poles, a hundred small carriages, a thousand oxcarts, a thousand varnished wood utensils, thirty thousand catties of bronze, a thousand piculs of safflower, plain wooden vessels and iron implements, two hundred horses, two hundred and fifty oxen, two thousand sheep and swine, a hundred slaves, a thousand catties of tendons, horns and cinnabar, thirty thousand catties of silk floss, a thousand bolts of patterned silk, a thousand piculs of coarse cloth, skin or hide, a thousand dou of lacquer, a thousand da of yeast, salt and salted beans; a thousand catties of large sea fish, a thousand piculs of small fish, thirty thousand catties of salted fish, three thousand piculs of jujubes and chestnuts, a thousand fox or squirrel furs, a thousand piculs of sheep skins, a thousand carpets, or a thousand zhong of fruit and vegetables; or if he lends out a thousand strings of cash, demanding an interest of thirty per cent from merchants who are greedy and fifty per cent from those who are scrupulous. This is the general rule.

佗杂业不中什二，则非吾财也。
除此之外的其他行业凡是得不到十分之二的利润的，就都不能干了。
Various other trades which bring in a profit of less than twenty per cent are not worth pursuing.

请略道当世千里之中，贤人所以富者，令后世得以观择焉。
下面我要讲一讲当代我们国家的发了财的能人，让后世得以知道。
Now let me speak briefly of how able men in recent times have made fortunes in different parts, so that later generations may profit by their example.

蜀卓氏之先,赵人也，用铁冶富。
蜀郡卓氏的祖先，本是赵国人，由炼铁发了财。
The ancestor of the Zhuo of Shu came from Zhao, where he made a fortune by smelting iron.

秦破赵，迁卓氏。卓氏见虏略,独夫妻推辇,行诣迁处。
秦灭赵后，下令让卓氏家族搬迁。卓氏夹在一群被裹挟的人群里，夫妻两个推着车子向指定的地方进发。
When Qin conquered Zhao, the family was moved away and Zhuo and his wife as captives had to push a cart to the place assigned to them.

诸迁虏少有余财,争与吏，求近处，处葭萌。
当时凡是身边有点钱的人，总是争着贿赂押解人员，请求把他们安置在较近的葭萌关一带。
Other captives who had little money asked the officers not to send them too far away, and were allowed to settle in Jiameng.

唯卓氏曰：“此地狭薄。吾闻汶山之下,沃野，下有蹲鸱,至死不饥。民工于市，易贾。”乃求远迁。
唯有卓氏说：“这个地方狭小又贫薄。我听说南方的汶山之下是沃野，长着许多芋类，可以充饥不致饿死。而且听说那里的居民喜欢做买卖，我们可以到那里去进行贸易活动。”于是他们请求远走。
But Zhuo said, "That is a circumscribed and barren region. I have heard that at the foot of Mount Wen there is fertile land where taros grow so well that no one need ever go hungry; and trade is easy in the local market." So he asked to be sent far away.

致之临邛,大喜，即铁山鼓铸,运筹策，倾滇蜀之民,富至僮千人。
押解人员把他放在了临邛，卓氏很高兴，他们就在那里的铁山下进行冶炼，他们动脑筋巧运筹，很快地就成了滇蜀一带的首户，家有奴婢千人。
He was assigned to Linqiong, to his great delight. Then he smelted iron ore from the mountain, contriving to have workers sent there from Dian and Shu. He became so rich that he had a thousand slaves.

田池射猎之乐，拟于人君。
他们修池堆山驰骋田猎，其风光排场简直和帝王一样。
and could live like a lord, hunting and shooting among the fields and lakes.

程郑，山东迁虏也,亦冶铸，贾椎髻之民,富埒卓氏，俱居临邛。
程郑，是从山东地区强制搬迁来的，也善于炼铁，和当地的少数民族做买卖，其富有的程度和卓氏差不多，也住在临邛。
Cheng Zheng, who was taken captive east of the mountains and forced to resettle, smelted iron too and traded with the people who wear their hair in cone-shaped knots. He became as wealthy as Zhuo and also lived in Linqiong.

宛孔氏之先,梁人也，用铁冶为业。
南阳的孔氏，其先辈是大梁人，以炼铁为业，
The ancestors of the Kong family of Wan came from Wei (403B.C.-225B.C.) where they had made a living by smelting iron.

秦伐魏，迁孔氏南阳。
秦灭魏后，把孔氏家族迁到了南阳。
When Qin conquered Wei, the family was moved to Nanyang.

大鼓铸，规陂池,连车骑，游诸侯，因通商贾之利,有游闲公子之赐与名。
孔氏到南阳后大规模地发展了炼铁，赚了钱就修筑坡塘堤坝，他坐着车子，前呼后拥地在各国诸侯间往来，从事经商活动，他既有富贵公子的美名，又能得到许多赏赐。
and carried on iron smelting on a large scale till Kong owned hills and lakes and a retinue of carriages and horses. He travelled through various states making money by trading, but had the name of a gentleman of leisure.

然其赢得过当,愈于纤啬,家致富数千金，故南阳行贾尽法孔氏之雍容。
他所获得的经济利益，也远比那种吝啬的商人多，以至于家财多达几千金。而南阳一带的买卖人在进行商业活动的时候都学习孔氏的华贵大度。
while he was making fabulous profits, far exceeding those of other tight-fisted merchants. His family came to have thousands of piece of gold, and all the travelling merchants of Nanyang imitated his easy manner.

鲁人俗俭啬，而曹邴氏尤甚,以铁冶起，富至巨万。
鲁国的民风向来俭朴吝啬，而曹县的邴氏尤其厉害，他也是以炼铁起家，家财多得上亿。
The men of Lu are frugal and close-fisted, and the Bing family of Cao was more so than most. Although they made tens of thousands by smelting iron.

然家自父兄子孙约,俛有拾，仰有取,贳贷行贾遍郡国。
但他的父子兄弟们历来守着一条规定，用他们自己的话说，就是：“只要弯腰就得拾点什么;只要仰脸就得抓取点什么。”他家的放债经商足迹遍鲁国。
the whole family from the grandparents to the grandchildren by common accord seized every chance to make money. They engaged in usury as well as trade in all the provinces and principalities.

邹、鲁以其故多去文学而趋利者,以曹邴氏也。
邹、鲁一带由于出了邴氏家族，从而使得许多人不再念书都去做买卖了。
Indeed, it was owing to this family that so many people in Zou and Lu gave up the pursuit of learning to seek profit.

齐俗贱奴虏，而刀间独爱贵之。
齐国的风俗历来是不把奴仆当人看，而刀间独独爱护抬举他们。
The men of Qi despise slaves, but Dao Jian treated his well.

桀黠奴,人之所患也，唯刀间收取，使之逐渔盐商贾之利，或连车骑，交守相,然愈益任之。
对于狡猾的奴仆，一般主人都是很头疼的，唯有刀间专爱收取这样的人，他让他们去做买卖贩卖鱼盐。他们有的甚至乘着高车大马，去结交太守国相，越是如此刀间越信任他们。
And whereas other men mistrusted cunning slaves, he specially looked out for them and set them to trade in fish and salt to make a profit for him. Some of his slaves travelled about in carriages with mounted retainers and made friends with provincial governors and ministers, but Dao Jian only trusted them the more.

终得其力，起富数千万。故曰“宁爵毋刀”,言其能使豪奴自饶而尽其力。
结果他靠着这些人的力量发家致富，财产多达几千万。所以当地有人说：“宁可不做官也要去为刀家当奴仆。”其窍门就是让奴仆们得利而心甘情愿地为他效劳。
with the result that they helped him make tens of millions. Hence the saying, “An official title is not as good as working for Dao Jian.” This was because he let his slaves become rich and powerful while utilizing their abilities to the full.

周人既纤,而师史尤甚,转毂以百数,贾郡国，无所不至。
洛阳人吝啬，而师史尤其厉害，他家有上百辆的车子，在各地周游经商，足迹无所不至。
The men of Zhou are canny, and Shi Shi more than most. With a few hundred cartloads of goods, he traded in every single province and principality.

洛阳街居在齐秦楚赵之中,贫人学事富家,相矜以久贾，数过邑不人门，设任此等,故师史能致七千万。
洛阳地处齐、秦、楚、赵的中心，穷人学着富人的样子，争相比着出去做买卖，看谁可以长期不回家，就靠着这个，师史赚得的家财多达七千万。
Luoyang lies at the centre of Qi, Qin, Chu and Zhao, and the poor people in the city imitated the rich, priding themselves on making long business trips and passing their houses without time to cross the threshold. By employing such men, Shi Shi succeeded in making seventy million.

宣曲任氏之先,为督道仓吏。秦之败也，豪杰皆争取金玉，而任氏独窖仓粟。
宣曲任氏的先人，曾当过看管督道仓的小吏。秦朝被推翻后，当许多人都去官府抢夺金玉珠宝时，而任氏独独把粮食储藏了起来。
The ancestor of the Ren family of Xuanqu was a granary officer at Dudao. When the Qin empire was overthrown and the chief citizens were scrambling for gold and jade, Ren's was the only family to store up grain.

楚汉相距荥阳也,民不得耕种，米石至万,而豪杰金玉尽归任氏，任氏以此起富。
待至项羽与刘邦在荣阳对峙，由于没人种田，米价上涨到一万钱只能买一百二十斤时，于是被人们抢去的金玉珠宝就渐渐地都归到任氏家里来了，从此任氏大富。
Soon the armies of Chu and Han (206B.C-8A.D.) were locked in combat at Xingyang, the peasants could not farm and the price of a picul of rice rose to ten thousand. Then gold and jade flowed from the others to the Rens, who made a fortune.

富人争奢侈，而任氏折节为俭，力田畜。人争取贱贾,任氏独取贵善。富者数世。
一般来说富人总是爱挥霍奢侈的，而任氏却始终不摆阔气，坚持节省，努力种田放牧。种田放牧的人们一般总爱不顾质量地买便宜货，而任氏却始终不怕多花钱而买好的。就这样任氏家族一直富贵了好几代。
Most rich men rival each other in extravagance, but the Rens lived simply and frugally, farming and raising cattle. Most farmers and cattle-breeders look out for bargains, but they bought only the best and most valuable. That is why they have remained rich for generations.

然任公家约,非田畜所出弗衣食,公事不毕则身不得饮酒食肉。以此为闾里率，故富而主上重之”。
他们家有条规定：“凡不是自家耕田放牧出产的东西，一律不用；事情只要没有办完，就绝不许喝酒吃肉。”他们就是这样来为乡里作表率的，所以他们自己富了还能得到皇上的喜爱。
The elder Ren has a rule that the family must not eat or wear anything not produced from their own fields and pastures, and must not drink wine or eat meat till their business is finished. As a result, they are an example to the whole district, rich and highly regarded by the emperor.

塞之斥也,唯桥姚已致马千匹，牛倍之，羊万头，粟以万钟计。
当汉朝对四夷用兵的时候，桥姚趁机经商，使家产发展到有马一千匹，牛两千头，羊一万只，粮食上万钟。
After the extension of the northern frontier, Qiao Yao alone seized the opportunity to acquire a thousand horses, two thousand head of cattle, ten thousand sheep and ten thousand zhong of grain.

吴楚七国兵起时,长安中列侯封君行从军旅,赍贷子钱,子钱家以为侯邑国在关东,关东成败未决，莫肯与。
吴楚七国造反时，住在长安的列侯封君们都得去当兵了，他们向人借钱，而放债的却不愿借给他们，因为他们的封地在东方，而东方的胜败局势还不明朗。
When Wu, Chu and the five other states revolted, the nobles in Chang'an joined the imperial army and tried to raise money for the expedition. But because their principalities lay east of the Pass and the outcome of the fighting there was uncertain, most of the money-lenders refused to make loans.

唯无盐氏出捐千金贷,其息什之。三月，吴楚平。一岁之中，则无盐氏之息什倍，用此富埒关中。
这时唯有无盐氏拿出了千金，借给他们使用，收十倍的利息。结果只用了三个月叛乱就被平定了。于是一年之内无盐氏的家产就翻了十番，可与关中最富的豪族相比了。
Only the Wuyan family lent them a thousand pieces of gold at an interest of nine hundred per cent. When three months later the rebellion was crushed, Wuyan received a tenfold return on his money, becoming one of the richest men within the Passes.

关中富商大贾，大抵尽诸田，田啬、田兰。韦家栗氏,安陵、杜杜氏,亦巨万。
关中地区的大富商有田啬、田兰。此外韦家地区的栗氏，安陵、杜县的杜氏，家产也都上亿。
Most of the wealthiest merchants within the Passes belong to the Tian family, such as Tian Se and Tian Lan. The Li family of Weijia and the Du families of Anling and Du are also worth millions.

此其章章尤异者也。皆非有爵邑奉禄弄法犯奸而富，尽推理去就，与时俯仰,获其赢利，以末致财，用本守之,以武一切，用文持之,变化有概,故足术也。
以上所说都是最著名最有本事的，他们都不是靠着爵位俸禄，也不是靠着为非作歹而发财，他们都是靠着观望时机，顺水推船，而一旦经商发财后，又能转化到农业上来。他们恰如是以武力夺得天下而以德守成的治理国家一样，他们变化有方，值得称道。
These are some of the most outstanding examples. None of these men had fiefs or government stipends, nor did they make money by evading the law or by sharp practice. They simply acted intelligently and kept up with the times. They made their fortunes in trade and handicrafts but preserved them through agriculture, seized their wealth in war but retained it by peaceful means. There was method in their rise to fortune which is worth studying.

若至力农畜，工虞商贾，为权利以成富，大者倾郡,中者倾县，下者倾乡里者，不可胜数。
至于那些一般的靠着农业放牧，或是靠着开发山林湖海，或是靠着作官掌权而发财的，大的独霸全郡，中者独霸全县，小者称霸乡里的，那种人简直就数不过来了。
Countless other cases might be cited of men who made money by working hard at farming, cattle-breeding, handicrafts, lumbering or trade, the greatest of them dominating provinces, the next counties, and the lesser ones villages.

夫纤啬筋力,治生之正道也，而富者必用奇胜。
靠着省吃俭用不惜力气，这是发家的正道，但要想发财还得出奇制胜。
Thrift and hard work are the proper way to make a living, yet men always owe their wealth to some special gift.

田农，掘业,而秦扬以盖一州。掘冢，奸事也，而田叔以起。博戏，恶业也，而桓发用富。行贾,丈夫贱行也，而雍乐成以饶。贩脂，辱处也，而雍伯千金。卖浆，小业也，而张氏千万。洒削,薄技也，而郅氏鼎食。胃脯，简微耳，浊氏连骑。马医,浅方，张里击钟。
种田是笨拙的职业，而秦阳却靠着种田成了一州的首富；挖坟是犯法的，但田叔却由此发了家；赌博是坏行当，而桓发却因此发了起来；穿街走巷地叫卖看起来是低贱的，而雍州的乐成却因此致富；挑着担子卖油是被人们看不起的，而雍州的乐成却由此家致千金。卖水够卑小了吧，而张家赚了一千万；抢剪子磨刀算是小伎俩了吧，而郅家由此列鼎而食；做肚干可算低微的，而浊家由此骑侍成群；当兽医是小方术，而张里家吃饭击钟，贵比王侯。
Farming is rough work, yet by it Qin Yang became predominant in his province. Grave-robbing is evil, yet this gave Tian Shu a start in his career. Gambling is bad, yet that is how Huan Fa made his money. Pedding is a low occupation, yet Le Cheng of Yong became wealthy in this way. Selling animal fat is degrading, yet by so doing Yong Bo made a thousand gold pieces. Hawking drinks is a poor trade, yet that is how the Zhang family made ten million. Sharpening knives requires little skill; yet it enabled the Zhi family to live like lords with food served in tripods. Selling preserved tripe is lowly enough, yet in this way the Zhuo family had a mounted retinue. A horse doctor is held cheap, yet Zhang Li had bronze bells to make music.

此皆诚壹之所致。
这些人都是靠着专心致志地努力干。
All these men achieved wealth through single-mindedness.

由是观之，富无经业,则货无常主,能者辐凑,不肖者瓦解。千金之家比一都之君，巨万者乃与王者同乐。岂所谓“素封”者邪?非也?
由此看来，什么行业都有可能发财，而货币也并不总是属于谁家，有本事的就能赚大钱，没出息的就会赔出去。一个千金之家的排场可以和一个都城的封君相比，一个财产上亿的家族，其享乐程度就和国王一样了。这不就是人们通常所讲的“素封”吗!
From this we can see that there is no fixed road to wealth,and goods do not stay with the same master for ever.Wealth flows to those with ability as the spokes of a wheel converge upon the axle,but it slips like a smashed tile through the hands of incompetent men.A family with a thousand pieces of gold is comparable to the lord of a city;a man with millions can live like a king.Not for nothing are such men called“nobles without fiefs”.