张廷尉释之者，堵阳人也，字季。有兄仲同居。以訾为骑郎，事孝文帝，十岁不得调，无所知名。
廷尉张释之是堵阳县人，字季。他有个哥哥叫张仲，兄弟二人住在一起。张释之因为家产丰厚得以入选为骑郎，侍奉孝文帝，（但）做了十年都没得到升迁，没什么名气。
The chief justice Zhang Shizhi, whose courtesy name was Zhang Ji, was a man of Duyang and lived with his elder brother Zhang Zhong. He bought the post of a cavalry guard under Emperor Wen, but served for ten years without winning promotion, remaining unknown.


释之曰：“久宦减仲之产，不遂。”欲自免归。中郎将袁盎知其贤，惜其去，乃请徙释之补谒者。
张释之说：“长久做郎官耗减哥哥的家产，（心里）不安。”想主动请求免职回家。中郎将袁盎知道他贤能，舍不得他离开，就奏请调张释之补任谒者的空缺。
"I have served all this time and been a considerable expense to my brother, without getting anywhere," he said and offered to resign and go home. But Yuan Ang, the captain of the palace guards, knew his ability and thought it would be a pity if he left. He therefore had him transferred to the post of an imperial herald.


释之既朝毕，因前言便宜事。文帝曰：“卑之，毋甚高论，令今可施行也。”于是释之言秦、汉之间事，秦所以失而汉所以兴者，久之。文帝称善，乃拜释之为谒者仆射。
张释之朝见完毕后，趁机上前陈述对国家有利的事。文帝说：“现实些，别讲太高深的论调，要让（建议）现在就能施行。”于是张释之谈论起秦、汉交替时的事，分析秦朝灭亡、汉朝兴起的原因，讲了很久。文帝称赞（他说得好），就任命他为谒者仆射。
After his presentation at court, Zhang Shizhi stepped forward to propose reforms. "Let's have no high-flown schemes," said Emperor Wen, "but modest proposals which can be put into practice.” Then Zhang Shizhi spoke at some length of the Qin and Han Dynasties, the reason for Qin's downfall and Han's rise to power. The emperor, approving his views, made him the chief herald.


释之从行，登虎圈。上问上林尉诸禽兽簿，十余问，尉左右视，尽不能对。
张释之跟随（文帝）出行，登上虎圈。文帝问上林尉各种禽兽的登记册（情况），提了十几个问题，上林尉左看右看，全答不上来。
Once he went with Emperor Wen to see the Tiger Enclosure in Shanglin Park. The emperor asked the warden more than ten questions about the animals and birds listed in the park records, but the warden looked this way and that and could not reply.


虎圈啬夫从旁代尉对上所问禽兽簿，甚悉。欲以观其能口对响应无穷者。
看管虎圈的啬夫从旁边代替上林尉回答文帝的问题，（回答得）很详尽，（他）想借此显示自己能随口应答、毫无滞碍的能力。
Then the tiger-keeper, standing near by, answered for him, going into great detail to display his knowledge, reeling off the answers and hardly stopping for breath.


文帝曰：“吏不当如是邪？尉无赖！”乃诏释之拜啬夫为上林令。
文帝说：“官吏不就该这样吗？上林尉太无能了！”于是下诏让张释之任命啬夫为上林令。
“That's how the warden should be,” said Emperor Wen. “The other fellow is no good.” He told Zhang Shizhi to have the keeper made warden of the park.


释之久之前曰：“陛下以绛侯周勃何如人也？”上曰：“长者也。”又复问：“东阳侯张相如何如人也？”上复曰：“长者。”
张释之过了好一会儿才上前说：“陛下认为绛侯周勃是怎样的人？”文帝说：“是忠厚长者。”（张释之）又问：“东阳侯张相如是怎样的人？”文帝又说：“是忠厚长者。”
After a little reflection, Zhang Shizhi stepped forward and asked, “What is your opinion, sir, of Zhou Bo the marquis of Jiang?” “An excellent man.” “What of Zhang Xiangru the marquis of Dongyang?” "Another excellent man.”


释之曰：“夫绛侯、东阳侯称为长者，此两人言事，曾不能出口，岂教此啬夫谍谍利口捷给哉！
张释之说：“绛侯、东阳侯被称为忠厚长者，这两个人谈论事情时，竟连话都说不流利，难道要让他们学这个啬夫（那样）滔滔不绝、伶牙俐齿吗！
“You call both of them excellent men, yet when it comes to making reports they can hardly get a word out. They are not as glib and fluent as this keeper.


且秦以任刀笔之吏，吏争以亟疾苛察相高，然其敝徒文具耳，无恻隐之实。以故不闻其过，陵迟而至于二世，天下土崩。
况且秦朝因为任用那些舞文弄墨的官吏，官吏们争着以办事急促、督察苛刻来比高低，可这样做的弊病只是（徒有）表面的文书程序罢了，没有一点体恤百姓的实际举措。因此（皇上）听不到自己的过失，（国家）逐渐衰败，到秦二世时，天下就土崩瓦解了。
The emperor of Qin employed scribes who tried to outdo each other in harshness and severity. Their fault was that they enforced the letter of the law, untempered by mercy, and as the emperor never realized his mistakes, things went from bad to worse until, in the reign of the Second Emperor, the empire fell to pieces.


今陛下以啬夫口辩而超迁之，臣恐天下随风靡靡，争为口辩而无其实。且下之化上疾于景响，举错不可不审也。”文帝曰：“善。”乃止不拜啬夫。
如今陛下因为啬夫能言善辩就越级提拔他，我担心天下人会跟风效仿，争着学能言善辩却不讲求实际（才干）。况且下面的人效仿上面的人，比影子追随形体、回声回应声音还快，（陛下的）举措不能不慎重啊。”文帝说：“好。”于是就打消了提拔啬夫的念头。
If you promote this keeper for his eloquence, sir, I fear others will follow his example and aim at eloquence instead of solid worth. Those below respond to the influence of those above as swiftly as shadows or echoes. Appointments and dismissals should be carefully considered.” The emperor approved and did not promote the keeper.


上就车，召释之参乘，徐行问释之秦之敝。具以质言。至宫，上拜释之为公车令。
文帝上了车，召张释之陪乘，（车子）缓缓前行，（文帝）问张释之秦朝的弊病。（张释之）都如实回答。到了宫中，文帝任命张释之为公车令。
Mounting his carriage, he asked Zhang Shizhi to take the reins, and as they drove slowly back questioned him about the mistakes of the Qin government. And he received practical, realistic answers. Upon their return to the palace, the emperor made him keeper of the palace gate.


顷之，太子与梁王共车入朝，不下司马门，于是释之追止太子、梁王，无得入殿门。遂劾不下公门不敬，奏之。
不久，太子和梁王同乘一辆车入朝，经过司马门时没有下车，于是张释之追上去拦住他们，不让（他们）进入殿门。接着（张释之）弹劾他们“经过宫门不下车，属不敬之罪”，并把这件事上奏朝廷。
Some time later the crown prince and prince of Liang drove together to the palace, but did not stop at the outer gate. Zhang Shizhi ran after them, stopped them, and would not let them enter the inner gate. He reported them to the throne for their disrespect in failing to alight at the palace gate.


薄太后闻之，文帝免冠谢曰：“教儿子不谨。”薄太后乃使使承诏赦太子、梁王，然后得入。
薄太后听说了这件事，文帝摘下帽子（向太后）谢罪说：“我教导儿子不严。”薄太后这才派使者传诏赦免太子和梁王，（他们）这才得以入宫。
... and the matter was referred to Empress Dowager Bo. Emperor Wen uncovered his head to apologize to her, saying, “I have not brought my sons up well,” after which she sent a messenger to order that the princes be pardoned, and then at last they were admitted.


文帝由是奇释之，拜为中大夫。顷之，至中郎将。
文帝因此认为张释之有奇才，任命他为中大夫。不久，（张释之）又升任中郎将。
Much impressed by this, Emperor Wen appointed Zhang Shizhi a court adviser. And later on he became captain of the palace guards.


从行至霸陵，居北临厕。是时慎夫人从，上指示慎夫人新丰道，曰：“此走邯郸道也。”
（张释之）跟随（文帝）出行到霸陵，（文帝）在霸陵北面的高台上远望。当时慎夫人也随行，文帝指着去新丰的路给慎夫人看，说：“这是通往邯郸的路。”
Zhang Shizhi once accompanied Emperor Wen to the imperial tomb at Baling. Looking down from the north side of the hill, the emperor turned to Lady Shen, who was also in attendance, and pointed out the Xinfeng highway. “That's the road to Handan," he told her.


使慎夫人鼓瑟，上自倚瑟而歌，意惨凄悲怀，顾谓群臣曰：“嗟乎！以北山石为椁，用紵絮斫陈，萦漆其间，岂可动哉！”左右皆曰：“善。”
（文帝）让慎夫人弹瑟，自己跟着瑟的曲调唱歌，神情凄惨悲伤，回头对群臣说：“唉！用北山上的石头做外椁，把苎麻絮剁细填充（石椁缝隙），再用漆封裹，（这样的陵墓）难道还能被打开吗！”左右的人都（附和）说：“好。”
He asked her to play the cithern and sang to her accompaniment. Then gazing sadly at his courtiers he said, “Ah, if we used stone from the north hill for the outer coffin, filled the cracks with hemp and silk floss and covered the whole with lacquer, no thief could break in.” All agreed.


释之前进曰：“使其中有可欲者，虽锢南山犹有隙；使其中无可欲者，虽无石椁，又何戚焉！”文帝称善。其后拜释之为廷尉。
张释之上前说：“要是（陵墓）里面有能引起人贪欲的东西，即使把它封在南山里，（也）还是会有缝隙；要是里面没有能引起人贪欲的东西，即使没有石椁，又有什么可担心的呢！”文帝称赞（说得）好。之后（文帝）任命张释之为廷尉。
... but Zhang Shizhi, who stepped forward and said, “If there is something men covet inside the coffin, even if it is sealed up under the south hill thieves will find a way in. If there is nothing men covet, even without a stone coffin there is no need to worry.” The emperor approved, and later made him chief justice.

顷之，上行出中渭桥，有一人从桥下走出，乘舆马惊。
不久，皇上出行经过中渭桥，有一个人从桥下面跑出来，皇上乘坐的车马受了惊。
Some time after this, Emperor Wen was crossing the Middle Wei Bridge when a man ran out from under the bridge, frightening the horses of the imperial carriage.

于是使骑捕，属之廷尉。
于是派骑士把那个人捕获，把他交付给廷尉。
Cavalrymen were sent to seize this man and take him to the chief justice.

释之治问。
张释之审问那人。
Zhang Shizhi tried the fellow.

曰：“县人来，闻跸，匿桥下。久之，以为行已过，即出，见乘舆车骑，即走耳。”
那人说：“我是县里的乡民来到这里，听到清道戒严的号令，藏到桥下面。过了许久，以为皇上的车马已经过去了，就从桥下出来，看见皇上乘坐的车马，立刻跑起来了。”
who said he came from the country; when he heard the order ‘Clear the way for the emperor!' he hid himself for a long time under the bridge, coming out when he thought the retinue had passed; then, at sight of the imperial carriage and riders, he ran.

廷尉奏当，一人犯跸，当罚金。
廷尉上奏依法量刑应给予的处罚，一个人违反了清道戒严的号令，按刑法处以罚金。
The chief justice recommended that he be fined for violating the order to clear the way.

文帝怒曰：“此人亲惊吾马，吾马赖柔和，令他马，固不败伤我乎？而廷尉乃当之罚金！”
文帝大怒道：“这个人本身惊吓了我的马，幸亏我的马性情温和，假若是别的马，不是一定会伤害了我吗？可是廷尉却只判处他罚金！”
“That fellow frightened my horses!” protested Emperor Wen indignantly. “It's a good thing that team is so docile. Had they been any other, I should have been hurt. Yet the chief justice simply fines him.”

释之曰：“法者天子所与天下公共也。今法如此，而更重之，是法不信于民也。
张释之说：“法律是天子和天下人共同遵守的东西。现在法律是这样规定的，却要加重处罚，这样法律就不能取信于民了。
“The law should be observed by the Son of Heaven and the people alike,” replied Zhang. “This is the law and, were I to impose a heavier punishment, the people would lose faith in the law.

且方其时，上使立诛之则已。今既下廷尉，廷尉，天下之平也。一倾，而天下用法皆为轻重，民安所措其手足？唯陛下察之。”
况且在当时，皇上派人就地杀掉他也就罢了。现在既然交付给廷尉，廷尉是全国判刑公平的象征。一旦偏斜，天下使用法律时都会因此而减轻或加重，民众岂不要手足无措了吗？希望陛下明察这件事。”
If Your Majesty had ordered the man to be executed on the spot, no one would have objected. But the matter was referred to the chief justice who should administer justice impartially to all. If I show bias all officers will apply the law with a bias, and the people will not know what to do. I beg Your Majesty to consider this.”

良久，上曰：“廷尉当是也。”
很久，皇上说：“廷尉量刑是对的。”
The emperor thought it over and said, “The sentence proposed by the chief justice is right.”

其后有人盗高庙坐前玉环，捕得，文帝怒，下廷尉治。
那以后，有个人偷了高祖庙神座前面的玉环，被抓住了，文帝大怒，交付给廷尉治罪。
Later a jade ring was stolen from the shrine of Emperor Gaozu’s temple. The thief was caught and the emperor in a passion sent him to the chief justice for trial.

释之案律盗宗庙服御物者为奏，奏当弃市。
张释之按照法律中偷盗宗庙服饰器物的规定上奏，奏明应判处斩首示众。
Zhang Shizhi ruled that, since this was a case of stealing from an ancestral temple, the culprit should be publicly executed.

上大怒，曰：“人之无道，乃盗先帝庙器，吾属廷尉者，欲致之族，而君以法奏之，非吾所以共承宗庙意也。”
皇上非常恼怒说：“那个人无道胡为，竟敢偷盗先帝宗庙的器物，我之所以交付廷尉审理，是要灭掉他的全族，可是你却依法上奏这件案子，这不是我用来恭敬奉承宗庙的用意。”
The emperor protested in a rage, “This fellow had the effrontery to rob Emperor Gaozu's temple! I sent him to you expecting to have him and his relatives executed, but you simply passed sentence according to the law. This is not my idea of respect to ancestral temples.”

释之免冠顿首谢曰：“法如是足也。且罪等，然以逆顺为差。
张释之摘掉帽子叩头赔罪说：“按照法律这样判处就足够了。况且斩首示众和灭族同样是死罪，但是以罪责的逆顺轻重程度而论，是有差别的。
Zhang Shizhi bared his head and bowed to apologize, saying, “That is all the law demands. Besides, there are different degrees in the same crime.

今盗宗庙器而族之，有如万分之一，假令愚民取长陵一抔土，陛下何以加其法乎？”
如今偷盗宗庙器物就诛灭他的全族，如果万一，假设愚民盗掘了长陵，陛下又该怎样加重对他的刑罚呢？”
If you wiped out this man's relatives because he robbed the temple, how would you punish some fool --if we can imagine such a case - who dug up Emperor Gaozu's tomb?”

久之，文帝与太后言之，乃许廷尉当。
过了很久，文帝和太后谈论这件事，才准许了廷尉的判罚。
Emperor Wen discussed this later with the empress dowager and they agreed that Zhang Shizhi was right.

是时，中尉条侯周亚夫与梁相山都侯王恬开见释之持议平，乃结为亲友。
当时，中尉条侯周亚夫和梁相山都侯王恬开看到张释之执法判决公正，就和他结为亲密朋友。
At that time the metropolitan tribune Zhou Yafu, marquis of Tiao, and Wang Tiankai, marquis of Shandu and prime minister of Liang, were so struck by Zhang Shizhi's fair administration of justice that they allied themselves with him by marriage.

张廷尉由此天下称之。
张廷尉因此得到天下人的称颂。
Then the fame of Chief Justice Zhang spread through all the land.

后文帝崩，景帝立，释之恐，称病。
后来文帝去世，景帝即位，张释之很恐惧，声称有病。
When Emperor Wen died and Emperor Jing came to the throne, Zhang Shizhi was afraid and pretended to be unwell.

欲免去，惧大诛至；欲见谢，则未知何如。
他想要辞职离开，害怕会有杀身大祸降临；想要见景帝当面谢罪，却又不知道怎样才好。
He wanted to resign but feared that might result in his execution. He wished to apologize, but did not know how the emperor would take it.

用王生计，卒见谢，景帝不过也。
他采用王生的计策，终于得以当面谢罪，景帝没有责怪他。
Finally on the advice of Wang Sheng he apologized to Emperor Jing, who did not punish him.

王生者，善为黄、老言，处士也。
王生擅长黄老学说，是个处士。
Wang Sheng lived in retirement and was well versed in the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Lao Zi.

尝召居廷中，三公九卿尽会立，王生老人，曰“吾袜解”，顾谓张廷尉:“为我结袜!”
曾经被召进朝廷中，三公九卿都相聚而立，王生是老年人，说“我的袜子松了”，回头对张廷尉说:“替我系好袜子!”
Once he was summoned to court and allowed to sit down while all the chief ministers were standing around. The old man exclaimed, “My leggings are coming down!” And turning to Zhang Shizhi he said, “Tie them up for me, will you?”

释之跪而结之。
张释之跪下替他系好袜子。
Zhang Shizhi knelt down and did as he was told.

既已，人或谓王生曰:“独奈何廷辱张廷尉。使跪结袜?”
过后，有人对王生说:“为什么单单在朝廷上侮辱张廷尉，让他跪下替你系袜子?”
Later Wang Sheng was asked, “Why did you insult the chief justice in public by making him kneel down and tie up your leggings?”

王生曰:“吾老且贱，自度终无益于张廷尉，张廷尉方今天下名臣，吾故聊辱廷尉使跪结袜，欲以重之。”
王生回答说:“我年老而且地位卑贱，自己揣度终究不会对张廷尉有什么益处。张廷尉是当今天下的名臣，我故意要姑且侮辱廷尉，让他跪下替我系袜子，是想要加重他的名望。”
“I am an old man in a humble position,” replied Wang Sheng. “What can I do to help the chief who is known throughout the land? I put him to the indignity of kneeling to tie up my leggings so that men might respect him even more.”

诸公闻之，贤王生而重张廷尉。
各位公卿听说这件事，都称颂王生的贤能，敬重张廷尉。
Word of this increased men's regard for Wang Sheng as well as their respect for Zhang Shizhi.

张廷尉事景帝岁余，为淮南王相，犹尚以前过也。
张廷尉事奉景帝一年多，改作淮南王相，还是因为从前得罪过景帝的缘故。
Zhang Shizhi served as chief justice under Emperor Jing for more than a year, after which he was transferred to be chief minister to the prince of Huainan. Evidently this was because of his former fault.

久之，释之卒。
很久以后，张释之去世。
He died some time afterwards.

其子曰张挚，字长公，官至大夫，免。
他的儿子叫张挚，字长公，做官做到大夫，被免职。
His son Zhang Zhi, whose courtesy name was Changgong, served as a high official but was dismissed.

以不能取容当世，故终身不仕。
因为他不善于取悦当朝的权贵，所以终身没有再做官。
Because he could not follow the fashion, he never again held an official post.

冯唐者，其大父赵人。
冯唐，他的祖父是赵国人。
Feng Tang's grandfather came from Zhao.

父徙代。汉兴徙安陵。
父亲迁居到代地。汉朝建立后迁徙到安陵。
His father moved first to Dai and then, at the beginning of the Han Dynasty, to Anling.

唐以孝著，为中郎署长，事文帝。
冯唐以孝行著称，做了中郎署长，事奉文帝。
Because of his reputation for filial piety Feng Tang served as a lieutenant to the chief of the palace guard under Emperor Wen.

文帝辇过，问唐曰:“父老何自为郎?家安在?”
文帝乘车经过郎署时，问冯唐:“老人家为什么还做着郎官?家在哪里?”
Once the emperor, passing in his sedan-chair, asked, “How did you become a palace guard? Where are you from?”

唐具以实对。
冯唐都如实回答了。
When Feng Tang had explained his background.

文帝曰:“吾居代时，吾尚食监高祛数为我言赵将李齐之贤，战于钜鹿下。今吾每饭，意未尝不在钜鹿也。父知之乎?”
文帝说:“我在代地的时候，我的尚食监高祛多次对我谈论赵将李齐的贤能，他曾经战斗在巨鹿城下。如今我每当吃饭的时候，心思都未尝不是在巨鹿。老人家知道这个人的事迹吗?”
the emperor said, “When I was in Dai, the imperial steward Gao Qu often told me what a fine general Li Qi of Zhao was, and how he fought that battle at Julu. Now I hardly ever sit down to a meal without thinking of the Battle of Julu. Did you know Li Qi?”

唐对曰:“尚不如廉颇、李牧之为将也。”
冯唐回答说:“他还不如廉颇、李牧做将官高明。”
“He was not such a great general as Lian Po and Li Mu,” said Feng Tang.

上曰:“何以?”
皇上问:“为什么?”
“Why do you say that?”

唐曰:“臣大父在赵时，为官卒将，善李牧。臣父故为代相，善赵将李齐，知其为人也。”
冯唐说:“我祖父在赵国的时候，当官领将，和李牧友善。我父亲从前做代相，和赵将李齐友善，知道他的为人。”
“When my grandfather served in Zhao as a centurion, he knew Li Mu well. And my father as chief minister of Dai was friendly with General Li Qi. So I know what sort of men they were.”

上既闻廉颇、李牧为人，良说，而搏髀曰:“嗟乎!吾独不得廉颇、李牧时为吾将，吾岂忧匈奴哉!”
皇上听说了廉颇、李牧的为人，非常高兴，拍打着大腿说:“唉!我偏偏不能得到廉颇、李牧做我的将官，有了他们我难道会担忧匈奴吗!”
Delighted to hear about Lian Po and Li Mu, the emperor slapped his thigh and exclaimed, “Ah, if I had generals like them, I need not worry about the Huns!”

唐曰:“主臣!陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。”
冯唐说:“主上!陛下就是得到廉颇、李牧，也不会起用的。”
“Excuse my presumption, sir,” said Feng Tang, “But even if you had Lian Po or Li Mu, you would not be able to use them.”

上怒，起入禁中。
皇上大怒，起身进皇宫了。
The emperor sprang up angrily and went back to the inner palace.

良久，召唐让曰:“公奈何众辱我，独无闲处乎?”
过了很久，召见冯唐责怪说:“你为什么当众侮辱我，难道就不能在避开人的地方说吗?”
After some time he summoned Feng Tang and reproached him. “Why did you insult me in public?” he asked. “Couldn't you have waited till we were alone?”

唐谢曰:“鄙人不知忌讳。”
冯唐谢罪说:“我这粗鄙的人不知道忌讳。”
“I am a fool,” apologized Feng Tang. “I should have held my tongue.”

当是之时，匈奴新大人朝那，杀北地都尉卬。
当时，匈奴新近大举入侵朝那，杀死北地都尉孙卬。
When the Huns had just invaded Chaona in force, killing Sun Ang, the army commander of Beidi,

上以胡寇为意，乃卒复问唐曰:“公何以知吾不能用廉颇、李牧也?”
皇上忧虑胡人进犯这件事，就终于又去问冯唐:“你怎么知道我不能任用廉颇、李牧呢?”
and the emperor was worried about their incursions, he finally asked Feng Tang how he knew he couldn't make good use of men like Lian Po or Li Mu;

唐对曰:“臣闻上古王者之遣将也，跪而推毂，曰阃以内者，寡人制之;阃以外者，将军制之。”
冯唐回答说:“我听说上古的时候，君王派遣将官，要跪下推着车子，说朝中的事情，我来决定;外面的事情，将军来决定。”
in response, Feng Tang answered that he had heard ancient kings would kneel to push a general’s chariot wheels when seeing them off to war, saying they would handle domestic affairs while the general managed matters abroad,

军功爵赏，皆决于外，归而奏之。此非虚言也。
军功和爵位赏赐都由外面的将军决定，回来时再上奏朝廷。这不是虚妄的话。
with all military distinctions and awards decided by the general who only reported them after returning, and he added he was not making this up,

臣大父言，李牧为赵将居边，军市之租皆自用飨士，赏赐决于外，不从中扰也。
我祖父说，李牧做赵国的将官守卫边塞，军中市场上征来的租税都自己用来赏赐士卒，赏赐由外面的将军决定，君王不从中干扰。
then recounted his grandfather’s story that when Li Mu served as a general at Zhao's frontier, he spent all revenue from camp markets on his men and decided awards without court interference,

委任而责成功，故李牧乃得尽其智能，遣选车千三百乘，毂骑万三千，百金之士十万，
委托给他重任而要求他成功，因此李牧才能充分发挥他的智慧和才能，派遣选拔出来的战车一千三百辆，善射的骑兵一万三千人，能建战功的精锐士卒十万人，
allowing him to fully use his wisdom and ability—with 1,300 chariots, 13,000 mounted archers, and 100,000 elite fighters,

是以北逐单于，破东胡，灭澹林，西抑强秦，南支韩、魏。
因此向北驱逐了单于，击破了东胡，消灭了澹林，在西面抑制了强大的秦国，在南面抗拒韩、魏。
Li Mu drove away the Hunnish khan in the north, routed the Donghu, destroyed the Danlin, halted powerful Qin’s advance in the west, and supported Han (403B.C.-230B.C.) and Wei (403B.C.-225B.C.) in the south,

当是之时，赵几霸。
当时，赵国几乎称霸天下。
making Zhao nearly the leader of the states,

其后会赵王迁立，其母倡也。
这以后赶上赵王迁即位，他的母亲原是艺妓。
but later King Qian (son of a dancing girl) ascended the throne,

王迁立，乃用郭开谗，卒诛李牧，令颜聚代之。
赵王迁即位，就因为听了郭开的谗言，终于杀掉了李牧，让颜聚代替他。
listened to Guo Kai’s slanders, killed Li Mu, and appointed Yan Ju instead,

是以兵破士北，为秦所禽灭。
因此军队战败，被秦国消灭掉了。
leading to Zhao’s army defeat, men fleeing, and King Qian’s capture by Qin;

今臣窃闻魏尚为云中守，其军市租尽以维士卒，出私养钱，五日一椎牛，飨宾客军吏舍人，
如今我私下里听说魏尚担任云中太守，他把军中市场上征来的租税全部拿来赏赐士兵，还拿出自己的俸禄，每五天椎杀一头牛，款待宾客、军吏和属官，
Feng Tang then said he heard Wei Shang, when governor of Yunzhong, used all camp market revenue to feast his troops and spent his own money to kill an ox every five days for his protégés, officers, and stewards,

是以匈奴远避，不近云中之塞。
因此匈奴远远地避开，不敢靠近云中要塞。
keeping the Huns at a distance from Yunzhong’s ramparts,

虏曾一人，尚率车骑击之，所杀甚众。
匈奴曾经有一次入侵，魏尚率领兵马抗击，杀死非常多的敌人。
and inflicting heavy casualties on them when they crossed the frontier,

夫士卒尽家人子，起田中从军，安知尺籍伍符。
那些士卒全都是民家子弟，从乡村出来参军，怎会知道“尺籍”“伍符”之类的军中法令。
and he pointed out that soldiers were simple peasants from the fields who knew nothing of official documents (like military registers and team rosters),

终日力战，斩首捕虏，上功莫府，一言不相应，文吏以法绳之。
整天努力战斗，斩杀敌人首级，抓捕敌军俘虏，向将官报功时，仅仅一句话没有互相符合，司法官就用法令来制裁他们。
yet after hard fighting, if there was inconsistency in their reports of enemies killed or captured when submitting merits to the headquarters, civil officers punished them by law,

其赏不行而吏奉法必用。
他们应得的赏赐没有给予，可是司法官奉行的法令却一定要执行。
while rewards were rarely granted;

臣愚，以为陛下法太明，赏太轻，罚太重。
我很愚蠢，认为陛下的法令太严明，赏赐太轻，惩罚太重。
concluding that in his humble opinion, the emperor’s laws were too strict, rewards too small, and penalties too heavy—

且云中守魏尚坐上功首虏差六级，陛下下之吏，削其爵，罚作之。
况且云中太守魏尚就因为上报斩杀的敌人差了六个首级，陛下把他交付给司法官治罪，削夺了他的爵位，判处了一年徒刑。
citing Wei Shang’s punishment (tried, degraded of his title, and sentenced to penal servitude for reporting six more enemy heads than the actual number) as proof,

由此言之，陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。
从这件事说来，陛下即使是得到了廉颇、李牧，也不会使用的。
that even Lian Po or Li Mu would not be usable by the emperor,

臣诚愚，触忌讳，死罪死罪!
我确实愚蠢，触犯了忌讳，死罪死罪!
and he apologized for being a simpleton who couldn’t hold his tongue and deserved death for his presumption;

文帝说。
文帝听了很高兴。
Emperor Wen was pleased,

是日令冯唐持节赦魏尚，复以为云中守，
当天下令让冯唐持节赦免魏尚，重新让他担任云中太守，
so that same day he sent Feng Tang with imperial credentials to pardon Wei Shang and reinstate him as governor of Yunzhong,

而拜唐为车骑都尉，主中尉及郡国车士。
并且拜冯唐为车骑都尉，掌管中尉和各郡国的车战士兵。
and made Feng Tang a tribune of chariots and cavalry in charge of the chariots and horsemen under the Central Garrison Commander (Zhongwei) and local principalities.

七年，景帝立，以唐为楚相，免。
孝文帝后元七年，汉景帝即位，任命冯唐为楚国丞相，后来（冯唐）被免职。
Seven years later Emperor Jing came to the throne and appointed Feng Tang chief minister of Chu, but later dismissed him.

武帝立，求贤良，举冯唐。
汉武帝即位后，访求贤良人才，有人举荐冯唐。
After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he made a search for able and worthy men and Feng Tang was recommended.

唐时年九十余，不能复为官，乃以唐子冯遂为郎。
冯唐当时已九十多岁，不能再担任官职，于是（朝廷）任命冯唐的儿子冯遂为郎官。
He was then over ninety, however, and could not serve as an official, so his son Feng Sui was made a palace guard.

遂字王孙，亦奇士，与余善。
冯遂字王孙，也是个有奇才的人，和我关系很好。
Feng Sui's courtesy name was Wangsun. He, too, was a remarkable man and a good friend of mine.

太史公曰:张季之言长者，守法不阿意;
太史公说：张季（张释之）谈论忠厚长者，（他）遵守法度，不迎合君主的心意；
The Grand Historian comments: Zhang Shizhi (Zhang Ji) knew what constitutes a superior man and he upheld the law regardless of the emperor’s wishes.

冯公之论将率，有味哉!有味哉!
冯公（冯唐）谈论将领率军之道，有深意啊！有深意啊！
while Feng Tang's comments on what makes a good general are well worth pondering too.

语曰:“不知其人视其友。”
俗话说：“不了解一个人，就看他的朋友。”
The proverb says, “You can know a man by his friends.”

二君之所称诵，可著廊庙。
二位先生所称赞的（人和事），可以记载在朝廷的文书典籍中。
The sayings of these two men deserve to be preserved in the court archives.

《书》曰:“不偏不党，王道荡荡;不党不偏，王道便便。”
《尚书》说：“不偏私、不结党，王道就宽广平坦；不结党、不偏私，王道就顺畅通达。”
The Book of Documents says, “No prejudice, no bias, how broad is the Kingly Way! No bias, no prejudice, how smooth is the Kingly Way!”

张季、冯公近之矣。
张季、冯公（的品行）接近这样的标准了。
Both Zhang Shizhi and Feng Tang came close to this.