吕蒙字子明，汝南富陂人也。
吕蒙字子明，汝南郡富陂县人。
Lü Meng, also known as Ziming, was a native of Fubei in Runan.

少南渡，依姊夫邓当。
年轻时南渡长江，依附姐夫邓当。
 When he was a child, he crossed the Changjiang River, relying on his brother-in-law Deng Dang for a living.

当为孙策将，数讨山越。
邓当是孙策的部将，多次讨伐山越。
Deng Dang was at that time a commander under Sun Ce. Several times, he participated in the suppression of the Yue tribes in the mountains.

蒙年十五六，窃随当击贼，当顾见大惊，呵叱不能禁止。
吕蒙那时还只十五六岁，就悄悄跟随邓当去攻击山贼，邓当回头看见吕蒙大吃一惊，呵斥他却也没办法禁止。
Lü Meng, only about 15 or 16 at the time, followed Deng Dang stealthily to strike the enemy. When Deng Dang turned his head and surprisingly discovered him, he reproached him loudly but could not stop him.

归以告蒙母，母恚欲罚之，蒙曰：“贫贱难可居，脱误有功，富贵可致。
回来后邓当将这件事告诉了吕蒙的母亲，他母亲生气打算惩罚他，吕蒙说：“贫贱的生活难以维持，万一我从军立功，就能得到富贵。
After his return, he told Lü Meng’s mother about it, and his mother angrily intended to punish him. Lü Meng defended himself by saying, “The poor and humble life is difficult to maintain. Maybe I could have a chance to achieve some feats and become rich. 

且不探虎穴，安得虎子？”
况且不入虎穴，怎得虎子呢？”
Moreover, if you do not go to a tiger’s lair, how could you catch its cubs?”

母哀而舍之。
他的母亲怜惜他的志向而宽恕了他。
 His mother gave her sympathetic consent and forgave him.

时当职吏以蒙年小轻之，曰：“彼竖子何能为？此欲以肉喂虎耳。”
当时在邓当手下担任职务的小官因为吕蒙年纪小而轻视他，说：“吕蒙那小子有什么能耐？这是想拿他自己的肉来喂虎而已。”
At that time a petty officer under Deng Dang despised Lü Meng for being a teenager, and said, “What can you, a child, do? Are you going to feed tigers with your meat?”

他日与蒙会，又蚩辱之。
过些日子与吕蒙相见，又侮辱他。
On another day, upon meeting Lü Meng, he again sneered at and insulted him.

蒙大怒，引刀杀吏，出走，逃邑子郑长家。
吕蒙非常愤怒，拔出刀来杀了那个小官，然后逃走，跑到同乡郑长家里躲了起来。
 Lü Meng flew into a rage, drew a knife and killed the officer. He fled away and hid himself in the house of Zheng Chang, a town fellow.

出因校尉袁雄自首，承间为言，策召见奇之，引置左右。
后来又通过校尉袁雄出来自首，袁雄趁机替他向孙策求情，孙策召见吕蒙认为他很特别，便把他安置在自己身边。
Later he voluntarily surrendered himself to Colonel Yuan Xiong. Yuan Xiong took a chance, and plead to Sun Ce on behalf of Lü Meng. Sun Ce summoned Lü Meng, discovered that he was extraordinary, and appointed him as his close subordinate.

数岁，邓当死，张昭荐蒙代当，拜别部司马。
几年后，邓当去世，张昭举荐吕蒙接替邓当领兵，任命为别部司马。
After several years, Deng Dang died, and Zhang Zhao recommended Lü Meng as a substitute. Lü Meng was appointed special detachment commander.

权统事，料诸小将兵少而用薄者，欲并合之。
孙权统领军政事务后，清查小将系列中兵员既少且费用不足的部队，准备予以合并。
When Sun Quan took power, he planned to incorporate those units that held a few soldiers, insufficient expenses, and were led by young commanders.

蒙阴赊贳，为兵作绛衣行縢，及简日，陈列赫然，兵人练习，权见之大悦，增其兵。
吕蒙暗中借了一笔钱，为士兵们做了大红色的衣服和绑腿，等到检阅的那天，吕蒙的部队队列整齐威武，士兵人人都能操练，孙权见了非常高兴，于是就给吕蒙增补了兵员。
Lü Meng took a private loan to make red clothes and gaiters for his soldiers. On inspection day, Lü Meng’s troop lined up in good order and in high spirits, and every one drilled as required. Sun Quan was very pleased after inspection and allowed an increase of the number of soldiers under Lü Meng.

从讨丹杨，所向有功，拜平北都尉，领广德长。
吕蒙跟随孙权讨伐丹杨，所到之处都建有战功，被任命为平北都尉，兼任广德县长。
After that he followed Sun Quan to attack Danyang. Wherever he went, he achieved military feats. He was appointed north-suppressing captain and acting magistrate of Guangde.

从征黄祖，祖令都督陈就逆以水军出战。
后又跟随孙权征讨黄祖，黄祖命令都督陈就率领水军迎战。
He followed Sun Quan to attack Huang Zu. Huang Zu ordered his commander Chen Jiu to take his navy and meet the challenge against the current.

蒙勒前锋，亲枭就首，将士乘胜，进攻其城。
吕蒙率领前锋部队，亲自击斩陈就，将士们乘胜前突，进攻黄祖的城池。
Lü Meng headed the vanguard and cut off the head of Chen Jiu with his own hand, while the soldiers followed up with a victory after attacking the city.

祖闻就死，委城走，兵追禽之。
黄祖听说陈就死，就弃城逃跑，士兵们追上去将他活捉。
When Huang Zu heard of Chen Jiu’s death, he gave up on the city and escaped. Soldiers chased after and caught him.

权曰：“事之克，由陈就先获也。”
孙权说：“这次战事的成功，是由于首先打垮了陈就。”
Sun Quan summarized, “The success of the battle lies first in the catching of Chen Jiu.”

以蒙为横野中郎将，赐钱千万。
于是任命吕蒙为横野中郎将，赐钱一千万。
 He appointed Lü Meng as Battlefield-sweeping Royal General and rewarded him with ten million coins.

是岁，又与周瑜、程普等西破曹公于乌林，围曹仁于南郡。
这一年，吕蒙又与周瑜、程普等人向西进军在乌林打垮曹操，在南郡围困曹仁。
This year, Lü Meng, Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu and others went west and defeated Lord Cao at Wulin, whereupon they surrounded Cao Ren in Nan Prefecture.

益州将袭肃举军来附，瑜表以肃兵益蒙，蒙盛称肃有胆用，且慕化远来，于义宜益不宜夺也。
益州将领袭肃率领全军前来归附东吴，周瑜上表建议将袭肃的人马增补给吕蒙，吕蒙极力称赞袭肃有胆识才能，又是仰慕东吴教化远道前来归附，从道义上讲应该增加他的兵员而不应该夺取他的兵权。
Commander Xi Su of the Yi Provincial Army led his troops over to change their loyalties, and Zhou Yu wrote a memorial to suggest increasing Lü Meng’s troops by joining them with Xi Su’s soldiers. Lü Meng spoke highly of Xi Su’s audacity, and moreover, he talked of how he came from the remote place simply because he was attracted to the influence of Wu State, and it stood to reason that Xi Su should have been given more soldiers out of righteousness rather than be deprived of his soldiers.

权善其言，还肃兵。
孙权赞同吕蒙的说法，把部队归还给了袭肃。
Sun Quan agreed, and returned the soldiers to Xi Su.

瑜使甘宁前据夷陵，曹仁分众攻宁，宁困急，使使请救。
周瑜派甘宁先行占领夷陵，曹仁分派部队进攻甘宁，甘宁陷入重围情况危急，派出使者请求救援。
Zhou Yu dispatched Gan Ning as a vanguard to be stationed at Yiling, and Cao Ren divided his troops to attack Gan Ning. At that critical moment, he sent an urgent message for help.

诸将以兵少不足分，蒙谓瑜、普曰：“留凌公绩，蒙与君行，解围释急，势亦不久，蒙保公绩能十日守也。”
诸将认为人马本就有限不可再行分兵，吕蒙对周瑜、程普说：“让凌公绩留守，我与你们前去替甘宁解围，从当前形势看也用不了多长时间，我保证凌公绩定能坚守十天。”
The generals thought they did not have enough soldiers to be separated for use. Lü Meng said to Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu, “We will leave Ling Gongji here. I will go with you, and it will not take a long time to rescue him from an impending siege. I guarantee that Ling Gongji can hold for ten days here.”

又说瑜分遣三百人柴断险道，贼走可得其马。
又劝周瑜分派三百人砍伐木柴阻断危险通道，敌兵逃跑时可以截留他们的战马。
Again he persuaded Zhou Yu to send a group of three hundred soldiers to block the risky roads with firewood and trees, so that when the enemy tried to escape by the roads, their steeds would be detained.

瑜从之。
周瑜采用了吕蒙的建议。
Zhou Yu followed his suggestion. 

军到夷陵，即日交战，所杀过半。
援军到达夷陵，当天就与围城曹军交战，杀伤敌人过半。
When the army arrived at Yiling and battled against the enemy during the day, over half of the enemy was killed, and the rest fled at night.

敌夜遁去，行遇柴道，骑皆舍马步走。
曹军连夜逃遁，途中遇到被木柴阻塞的道路，骑兵都下马徒步逃走。
When they met the road obstacles that were made of firewood and trees, the enemy gave up their horses and ran away on foot.

兵追蹙击，获马三百匹，方船载还。
吴军一路穷追不舍，缴获曹军战马三百匹，之后把舟船连接起来将这些军马运回。
The soldiers chased urgently after them and caught three hundred horses, which were transported back in connecting boats.

于是将士形势自倍，乃渡江立屯，与相攻击，曹仁退走，遂据南郡，抚定荆州。
于是将士们气势倍增，就渡江建立屯营，跟江北曹军交锋，曹仁后撤逃走，吴军又占据了南郡，安抚平定了荆州。
Consequently all officers and soldiers were in high spirits. They crossed the river, constructed the campsites, attacked the enemy, and as a result Cao Ren retreated. After that the army of Wu State was stationed in Nan Prefecture, which soothed and pacified Jing Province.

还，拜偏将军，领寻阳令。
返回之后，吕蒙被任命为偏将军，兼寻阳县令。
After their return, Lü Meng was appointed wing general and acting magistrate of Xunyang.

鲁肃代周瑜，当之陆口，过蒙屯下。
鲁肃接替周瑜，要去陆口，路过吕蒙驻扎之处。
In order to succeed Zhou Yu, Lu Su would have to go to Lukou, passing by Lü Meng’s campsite.

肃意尚轻蒙，或说肃曰：“吕将军功名日显，不可以故意待也，君宜顾之。”
鲁肃仍有些轻视吕蒙，有人劝说鲁肃说：“吕将军的功绩名声日益显赫，不可以再用原来的观念对待他，您应当去拜访他。”
Lu Su to some extent still looked down on Lü Meng; however, someone persuaded Lu Su by saying, “General Lü has become increasingly well-known for his military feats. You cannot treat him slightly, and should pay him a visit.”

遂往诣蒙。
于是鲁肃去见吕蒙。
Lu Su then went to visit Lü Meng. 

酒酣，蒙问肃曰：“君受重任，与关羽为邻，将何计略以备不虞？”
酒到酣畅之际，吕蒙问鲁肃：“您担当重任，与关羽辖境相邻，准备采取何种方略来防备意料不到的事变呢？”
After drinking their fill, Lü Meng asked Lu Su, “You have accepted the important task, and become the neighbor of Guan Yu. What stratagems do you have in preparation for contingency?”

肃造次应曰：“临时施宜。”
鲁肃很随便地回答说：“临时视情况而定。”
Lu Su impudently replied, “Adapt to the contingencies in a timely manner.”

蒙曰：“今东西虽为一家，而关羽实熊虎也。计安可不豫定？”
吕蒙说：“现在东吴和西蜀虽然还是一家，但关羽实在是个猛如熊虎的大将。对策怎么可能不预先制定呢？”
Lü Meng said, “Although the East Wu and the West Shu are now in alliance, Guan Yu is really like a bear or a tiger. How can you not prepare beforehand?”

因为肃画五策。
接着便给鲁肃策划了五条对策。
 He therefore planned five stratagems for Lu Su.

肃于是越席就之，拊其背曰：“吕子明，吾不知卿才略所及乃至于此也。”
鲁肃于是越过座席来到吕蒙身边，拍着他的背说：“吕子明，我真没料到你的才能谋略竟达到了如此程度。”
Lu Su then moved from his seat to approach Lü Meng, patted his back and said, “Lü Ziming, I did not expect that you would have such an exceptional wit and resourcefulness.”

遂拜蒙母，结友而别。
于是就去拜见吕蒙的母亲，与吕蒙结成朋友之义才告辞离去。
 He paid a visit to Lü Meng’s mother, and made friends with Lü Meng before departure.

时蒙与成当、宋定、徐顾屯次比近，三将死，子弟幼弱，权悉以兵并蒙。
当时吕蒙的驻地与成当、宋定、徐顾的屯营彼此相邻，成当等三位将领去世，因为他们的子弟还都年纪幼小，孙权想把这三支部队合并到吕蒙的军队编制内。
At that time, Lü Meng’s campsite was close to those of Cheng Dang, Song Ding and Xu Gu. When the three generals died, their brothers and sons were young and weak. Sun Quan incorporated all their soldiers with Lü Meng’s.

蒙固辞，陈启顾等皆勤劳国事，子弟虽小，不可废也。
吕蒙坚决推辞，并上书陈述徐顾等将领都曾为国家大事辛勤操劳，他们的子弟虽然还小，却不可废弃。
Lü Meng firmly refused and replied that Xu Gu et al. had diligently exerted themselves in the state’s affairs, and because their brothers and sons were still young, they could not be abandoned. 

书三上，权乃听。
他连续三次上书，孙权才答应了。
Three successive memorials were presented before Sun Quan accepted this advice.

蒙于是又为择师，使辅导之，其操心率如此。
吕蒙于是又给这三位将领的子弟选择老师，让老师辅导教育他们，他为人操心办事大多如此。
Afterwards, Lü Meng selected teachers for them, showing his great care for others.

魏使庐江谢奇为蕲春典农，屯皖田乡，数为边寇。
魏国派庐江人谢奇担任蕲春典农都尉，屯营设在皖县，多次侵扰东吴边境。
Wei State sent Xie Qi of Lujiang as commander of agricultural production at Qichun. His troops were garrisoned in Wan, and they frequently harassed the border areas.

蒙使人诱之，不从，则伺隙袭击，奇遂缩退，其部伍孙子才、宋豪等，皆携负老弱，诣蒙降。
吕蒙派人去引诱他投降，他不肯理会，吕蒙就寻找机会袭击他，谢奇于是缩回退却，他的部下孙子才、宋豪等人，都扶老携幼，来向吕蒙投降。
Lü Meng sent someone to lure him in but he turned him down. Lü Meng found a chance to attack him, and Xie Qi then withdrew. His subordinates Sun Zicai, Song Hao and many others all came to surrender to Lü Meng, holding the old by the arm and pulling the young by the hand.

后从权拒曹公于濡须，数进奇计，又劝权夹水口立坞，所以备御甚精，曹公不能下而退。
吕蒙后又跟随孙权在濡须抗击曹操，屡次进献奇谋妙计，又劝孙权在濡须口两面建造坞堡，正因防御措施精细到位，曹操攻打不下这才撤退。
Later Lü Meng followed Sun Quan to resist Lord Cao at Ruxu, and several times, he offered ingenious stratagems, persuading Sun Quan to construct the fortresses which would span the mouth of Ruxu. The considerate defense construction was so exquisitely consummate that Cao Cao could not conquer it and had to retreat.

曹公遣朱光为庐江太守，屯皖，大开稻田，又令间人招诱鄱阳贼帅，使作内应。
曹操委派朱光为庐江太守，驻扎在皖县，大力开垦稻田，又派出间谍利诱招徕鄱阳贼帅，让他们作为内应。
Lord Cao appointed Zhu Guang prefect of Lujiang, and dispatched him to garrison his troops at Wan, where Zhu Guang reclaimed rice fields on a large scale and also ordered his spies to lure the chiefs of the rebels into Poyang to be the plant agents.

蒙曰：“皖田肥美，若一收孰，彼众必增，如是数岁，操态见矣，宜早除之。”
吕蒙说：“皖县田地肥沃，如果他们一旦收割了成熟的稻子，其人马必定增加，这样几年下来，曹操就要故态复萌大举南征了，应该及早铲除他们。”
Lü Meng said, “The fields of Wan are fertile. If they have their first harvest, there will surely be an increase of population. Within a few years of such development, Cao Cao will resume his plan of the southern expedition. It is better to eliminate them early.” 

乃具陈其状。
接着详细陈述了皖县的屯田现状。
With this impending threat in mind, he wrote a memorial to describe the situation in detail.

于是权亲征皖，引见诸将，问以计策。
于是孙权亲自率兵征讨皖县，召见诸将，询问进攻策略。
Subsequently Sun Quan decided to attack Wan himself. He summoned his generals, and consulted them for stratagems.

蒙乃荐甘宁为升城督，督攻在前，蒙以精锐继之。
吕蒙就推荐甘宁担任升城督，在前线指挥攻城，吕蒙率领精锐部队紧随其后。
Lü Meng recommended Gan Ning as fortifications-assaulting commander to conduct an attack on the front walls, and Lü Meng led the crack troops to follow closely in the rear.

侵晨进攻，蒙手执枹鼓，士卒皆腾踊自升，食时破之。
凌晨发起总攻，吕蒙亲自执槌擂鼓，士兵们都腾跃前冲奋勇登城，才到早餐时分就攻破了皖县。
Early in the morning, the general attack began. Lü Meng personally struck the drum, while soldiers charged bravely over the walls during the hour of breakfast, and the city of Wan was overtaken.

既而张辽至夹石，闻城已拔，乃退。
不久张辽进军到夹石，听说皖县城池已被攻陷，就退兵回去了。
Shortly after it, Zhang Liao marched to Jiashi and withdrew his soldiers upon hearing of the loss of Wan.

权嘉其功，即拜庐江太守，所得人马皆分与之，别赐寻阳屯田六百户，官属三十人。
孙权嘉奖吕蒙的功劳，就地任命他为庐江太守，缴获的人马都分给了他，另外又赐给他寻阳屯田客六百户，属官三十人。
Sun Quan rewarded Lü Meng for his deeds, and on the spot appointed him prefect of Lujiang, giving him a part of captured people and horses. He also bestowed on him six hundred households of army field farmers in Xunyang, and thirty subordinate officers.

蒙还寻阳，未期而庐陵贼起，诸将讨击不能禽，权曰：“鸷鸟累百，不如一鹗。”复令蒙讨之。
吕蒙回到寻阳，不到一年庐陵贼又起来作乱，诸将征讨攻打都没能擒获，孙权说：“鸷鸟上百，不如一只大鹏。”又命令吕蒙前去讨伐。
After Lü Meng returned to Xunyang, in less than a year, the bandits in Luling again rebelled. Many generals tried to suppress the bandits but failed in the capture. Sun Quan said, “Ordinary eagles, even crowded with hundreds, are inferior to a roc.” He again ordered Lü Meng to suppress the rebellion.

蒙至，诛其首恶，余皆释放，复为平民。
吕蒙一到庐陵，就诛杀了贼寇首领，其余的人都予以释放，让他们继续当平民百姓。
Upon arriving at Luling, Lü Meng killed the chief of the bandits, and the others were set free as common people.

是时刘备令关羽镇守，专有荆土，权命蒙西取长沙、零、桂三郡。
这时刘备命关羽镇守荆州，荆州全境都在刘蜀的控制之下，孙权命令吕蒙西向攻取长沙、零陵、桂阳等三郡。
At this time, Liu Bei ordered Guan Yu to defend Jing Province, which as a whole belonged to Shu State. Sun Quan ordered Lü Meng to take control of the three prefectures of Changsha, Lingling and Guiyang.

蒙移书二郡，望风归服，惟零陵太守郝普城守不降。
吕蒙致书长沙、桂阳二郡，二郡守将望风归附东吴，只有零陵太守郝普守城不肯归降。
Lü Meng wrote letters to the two prefects, who fell under Wu’s leadership upon learning of the attack. Only Hao Pu, the prefect of Lingling, defended the city without surrendering.

而备自蜀亲至公安，遣羽争三郡。
而刘备亲自从蜀中来到公安，派关羽争夺这三个郡。
On the other hand, Liu Bei himself arrived at Gong’an from Shu and dispatched Guan Yu to compete for the three prefectures.

权时住陆口，使鲁肃将万人屯益阳拒羽，而飞书召蒙，使舍零陵，急还助肃。
孙权当时驻扎在陆口，派鲁肃率领一万人驻扎在益阳抵御关羽，又派人快马加鞭将加急文书送给吕蒙，让他放弃零陵，火速返回援助鲁肃。
Sun Quan at this time stationed his army at Lukou, and dispatched Lu Su to lead ten thousand soldiers to be stationed at Yiyang against Guan Yu, and sent an urgent letter to summon Lü Meng, which asked him to give up Lingling and hurry back to assist Lu Su.

初，蒙既定长沙，当之零陵，过酃，载南阳邓玄之，玄之者，郝普之旧也，欲令诱普。
当初，吕蒙平定长沙郡之后，要去零陵郡，经过酃县时，让南阳人邓玄之同车而行，邓玄之这个人，是郝普的老友，吕蒙想让他诱降郝普。
After Lü Meng stabilized Changsha, he went to Lingling. On route to Ling (酃), he brought with him a man, Deng Xuanzhi of Nanyang, who was an old friend of Hao Pu. Lü Meng intended to use Deng Xuanzhi to ensnare Hao Pu into surrender.

及被书当还，蒙秘之，夜召诸将，授以方略，晨当攻城，顾谓玄之曰：“郝子太闻世间有忠义事，亦欲为之，而不知时也。
接到孙权让他回军北上的来信，吕蒙却秘而不宣，当夜召集诸将，部署计划，确定第二天早晨必定攻打零陵城，他回顾邓玄之说：“郝子太知道世间有忠义之事，也想这样做，可他不识时机，
When Lü Meng received the letter asking him to return, he kept it secret, and summoned his generals and commanders in the night in order to tell them of the tasks in regards to attacking the city early in the morning. He then turned his head back to Deng Xuanzhi and said, “When Hao Zitai heard the stories of loyalty and righteousness in the human world, he wanted to imitate the heroes, but he did not take into consideration the change of time.

左将军在汉中，为夏侯渊所围。
左将军刘备现在汉中，被夏侯渊所围困。
Left General Liu Bei is still in Hanzhong and is surrounded by Xiahou Yuan. 

关羽在南郡，今至尊身自临之。
关羽在南郡，现在我东吴国主也亲自到了那里。
Guan Yu is in Nan Prefecture, and now our most honorable master has arrived there in person.

近者破樊本屯，救酃，逆为孙规所破。
近日攻破了关羽设在樊城的大本营，关羽打算救援酃县，反倒被孙规打得大败。
Recently, Guan Yu’s headquarters in Fancheng were seized. He was going to rescue Ling, but was defeated by Sun Gui. 

此皆目前之事，君所亲见也。
这都是最近发生的事，您是亲眼所见的。
These things have all taken place recently, and you have seen it with your own eyes.

彼方首尾倒悬，救死不给，岂有余力复营此哉？
他们现在正是首尾倒悬，自救尚且来不及，哪里还有余暇再来营救零陵呢？
Their heads and tails are hanging upside down, and they are not capable of saving themselves. How can they have extra forces to save this place?

今吾士卒精锐，人思致命，至尊遣兵，相继于道。
如今我方士卒精锐，每个人都想拼死一战，国主又继续调兵遣将，现正络绎不绝地
Now I have the crack troops here. Everyone is preparing for a desperate battle, and our master is

今子太以旦夕之命，待不可望之救，犹牛蹄中鱼，冀赖江汉，其不可恃亦明矣。
如今子太以朝夕不保的性命，而引颈盼望着永远等不来的援兵，就像牛蹄窝积水中的鱼，想望着长江、汉水的救急一样，这种不可靠也是再明白不过的。
Now Zheng Zitai’s life is in extreme danger. He cannot be saved just as a fish in a pool of cow feet longs for the salvation of water from the Changjiang and the Han rivers to rescue it. It is quite clear that such a desire cannot be relied on.

若子太必能一士卒之心，保孤城之守，尚能稽延旦夕，以待所归者，可也；
如果子太能使士卒齐心，力保孤城不失，还可勉强拖延些时日，从而等待后来的变化和结果，这还可以；
If Zheng Zitai can unite his soldiers as one to defend the isolated city, then perhaps they can prolong their lives for a few more days while waiting for support or a change that will help them. It may be possible.

今吾计力度虑而以攻此，曾不移日而城必破，城破之后，身死何益于事？
可现在经过我对双方力量对比的分析并且照这方式实施攻击的话，用不了一天时间零陵城就将被攻破，城破之后，自己身死又于事何补？
Now in my estimation and analysis of our forces, if we start an attack, the city will, for certain, be taken over in less than a day. After the city is taken over, will he reap any benefits if he dies?

而令百岁老母，戴白受诛，岂不痛哉？
此外让自己的百岁老母，满头白发还落得个被杀的结局，难道不令人痛心吗？
Isn’t it a pity to lead to the death of his white-haired centenarian mother?

度此家不得外问，谓援可恃，故至于此耳。君可见之，为陈祸福。
我猜度郝普是得不到外面的消息，认为有援军可以倚仗，所以才到了今天这个地步。您可以去见他，给他讲讲祸福利害。
I guess it is because Hao Pu can’t receive any messages from the outside that he thinks he can still rely on outside support. That is why he refuses to see us, but you can see all these, and explain to him about calamity and fortune.

玄之见普，具宣蒙意，普惧而听之。
邓玄之去见郝普，详细转述了吕蒙的意见，郝普惧怕而听从了。
Deng Xuanzhi met Hao Pu, and told him in detail about Lü Meng’s intention. Hao Pu then entered a panic and accepted the advice.

玄之先出报蒙：“普寻后当至。”
邓玄之先出城回报吕蒙：“郝普稍后就到。”
Deng Xuanzhi came out in advance and reported it to Lü Meng, stating, “Hao Pu will come out presently.”

蒙豫敕四将，各选百人，普出，便入守城门。
吕蒙预先命令四位将领，各自挑选一百人，等郝普一出来，就立即进去守住城门。
Lü Meng had given order to four commanders, each having selected a hundred soldiers. As soon as Hao Pu came out, they would enter to hold the gates.

须臾普出，蒙迎执其手，与俱下船。
不一会郝普出城，吕蒙迎上去握住他的手，同他一起下船。
After a while, Hao Pu came out, and Lü Meng held his hand as they walked down into a boat.

语毕，出书示之，因拊手大笑。
寒暄已毕，吕蒙取出孙权所写来信给郝普观看，忍不住拍手大笑。
After they exchanged greetings, Lü Meng showed Hao Pu Sun Quan’s letter, and then laughed and clapped his hands.

普见书，知备在公安而羽在益阳，惭恨入地。
郝普看了信，明白刘备到了公安而关羽已驻扎在益阳，羞愧后悔得无地自容。
Hao Pu read the letter, understanding that Liu Bei was in Gong’an and Guan Yu was in Yiyang. He felt regret and extreme shame.

蒙留孙皎，委以后事，即日引军赴益阳。
吕蒙留下孙皎，委托他处理后来的事情，当天便率领军队赶赴益阳。
Lü Meng left Sun Jiao to deal with all the other affairs. On that day he led the army for Yiyang.

刘备请盟，权乃归普等，割湘水，以零陵还之。以寻阳、阳新为蒙奉邑。
刘备请求与孙权和好结盟，孙权便归还了郝普等人，约定以湘水为界，把零陵郡还给了刘备。又以寻阳、阳新二地作为吕蒙的奉邑。
Liu Bei pleaded for an alliance. Sun Quan then returned Hao Pu and others, divided the Xiang River as the border, and gave Lingling Prefecture back. He also rewarded Lü Meng with Xunyang and Yangxin as his emoluments.

师还，遂征合肥，既撤兵，为张辽等所袭，蒙与凌统以死捍卫。
孙权率师返回，接着征讨合肥，撤军途中，被张辽等人突袭，吕蒙与凌统拼死作战保卫了孙权的安全。
When the army was on its way home, Sun Quan attacked Hefei. During their withdrawal, the army was ambushed by Zhang Liao et al. Lü Meng and Ling Tong protected Sun Quan desperately, without concern for their own lives.

后曹公又大出濡须，权以蒙为督，据前所立坞，置强弩万张于其上，以拒曹公。
后来曹操又向濡须大举进军，孙权任命吕蒙为都督，据守以前所建的坞堡，在城堡上面设置了一万张强弩，以抵御曹操。
Later Lord Cao again headed a big army to attack Ruxu. Sun Quan appointed Lü Meng as commander. Lü Meng deployed his troops on the fortresses constructed not long ago, and arranged ten thousand strong cross-bows on them to resist Lord Cao.

曹公前锋屯未就，蒙攻破之，曹公引退。
曹军前锋到来尚未来得及站稳脚跟，吕蒙便出击打垮了他们，曹操率军退了回去。
Before Lord Cao’s vanguard completed their fortresses, Lü Meng took them over. Lord Cao had to retreat. 

拜蒙左护军、虎威将军。
孙权为此任命吕蒙为左护军、虎威将军。
Sun Quan appointed Lü Meng left defense-commander, and Tiger-prowess General.

鲁肃卒，蒙西屯陆口，肃军人马万余尽以属蒙。
鲁肃去世，吕蒙向西驻屯陆口，孙权把鲁肃的军队一万多人马全部归并给了吕蒙。
Lu Su died. Lü Meng replaced him and stationed his troops at Lukou. Lu Su’s troops of over ten thousand soldiers and horses were all incorporated under the command of Lü Meng.

又拜汉昌太守，食下隽、刘阳、汉昌、州陵。
又任命他为汉昌太守，以下隽、刘阳、汉昌、州陵四县作为他的食邑。
In addition, he was appointed prefect of Hanchang with Xiajun, Liuyang, Hanchang and Zhouling as his emoluments.

与关羽分土接境，知羽骁雄，有并兼心，且居国上流，其势难久。
与关羽的辖境相邻，吕蒙了解关羽骁勇雄豪，有并吞东吴的野心，而且对方又处在东吴国的上游，两国目前的和好局面势必难以持久。
Adjacent to Guan Yu’s territory, Lü Meng knew that Guan Yu was valiant and powerful, harboring the ambition to swallow Wu State. Shu State was in the upper reaches over Wu State, and the current alliance would surely not last long.

初，鲁肃等以为曹公尚存，祸难始构，宜相辅协，与之同仇，不可失也，蒙乃密陈计策曰：
起初，鲁肃等人认为曹操还在，魏国的祸害相连，蜀、吴应该互相帮助协同同心，形成同仇敌忾的局面，刘蜀这个盟友不可失去，吕蒙那时就曾向孙权秘密地陈述计策说：
At first, Lu Su and others thought Cao Cao was still alive, and Wei State would bring more troubles. Shu State and Wu State, facing the common enemy, would support and coordinate with each other, so that this alliance would not be abandoned. Lü Meng described in secret his strategy to Sun Quan,

令征虏守南郡，潘璋住白帝，蒋钦将游兵万人循江上下，应敌所在，蒙为国家前据襄阳，如此，何忧于操，何赖于羽？
“让征虏将军孙皎守南郡，潘璋驻守白帝城，蒋钦率游击兵力一万人沿长江上下行动，根据敌情所在随时实施机动攻击，吕蒙为国家前去占据襄阳，这样的话，曹操有什么可担忧的？关羽又有什么可依赖的呢？
“If you order Enemy-conquering General Sun Jiao to defend Nan Prefecture, Pan Zhang to station his troops at Baidi, Jiang Qin to lead the mobile forces of ten thousand soldiers to patrol along the Changjiang River, and to respond timely to where the enemies appear, I, Lü Meng, as a vanguard will station my troops in Xiangyang for our country. In such a deployment, why do we worry about Cao Cao? Why shall we rely on Guan Yu?

且羽君臣矜其诈力，所在反复，不可以腹心待也。
况且关羽君臣依仗他们的欺诈与暴力，所到之处都遭到倾覆，不可以把他们当作心腹看待。
Moreover, Guan Yu and his monarch have relied on their cheating and powerful forces, have made promises and denials in succession, and cannot be treated as intimate friends.

今羽所以未便东向者，以至尊圣明，蒙等尚存也。
如今关羽之所以还没有立即东向发难，是因为主上您的圣明，以及吕蒙等人还健在的缘故。
Today the reason why Guan Yu does not attack Wu State is that your majesty is wise as a sage, and also because Lü Meng and others are still alive.

今不于强壮时图之，一日僵仆，欲复陈力，其可得邪？”
现在若不能趁着我们还强壮的时候铲除这个祸患，一旦我们死去，想再要施展才力，那还能办得到吗？”
If we do not take the opportunity to eliminate him now when we are strong, then once we die, would our side succeed in wiping him out?”

权深纳其策，又聊复与论取徐州意，蒙对曰：
孙权深心采纳了他的全部计策，又顺便跟他讨论起攻取徐州的意图，吕蒙回答说：
Sun Quan accepted his strategy, and again they talked about the intention to take over Xu Province. Lü Meng analyzed,

今操远在河北，新破诸袁，抚集幽、冀，未暇东顾。
“如今曹操远在黄河以北，不久之前还打垮了袁熙、袁尚等人，安抚聚集了幽州和冀州，没有余暇顾及东面。
“Today Cao Cao is far away in the north of the Yellow River, having newly defeated the Yuans. He is soothing the people who have assembled in You and Ji Provinces, so he has no time to attack the east.

徐土守兵，闻不足言，往自可克。
徐州境内的驻防士兵，听说力量微不足道，只要进击自然可以攻克。
I have heard that the garrison troops in Xu Province are not worth mentioning; if we attack them, we can seize the place.

然地势陆通，骁骑所骋，至尊今日得徐州，操后旬必来争，虽以七八万人守之，犹当怀忧。
然而徐州地面只有陆路相通，适合骁勇的骑兵驰骋作战，主上您今日得到徐州，曹操不出十天就将前来争夺，即使动用七八万人来坚守它，攻守形势还是值得担忧。
However, its roads are connected throughout the land, and gallant cavalries are easily able to reach it. If your majesty takes Xu Province today, within ten days Cao Cao will certainly come to compete for it. Although you can defend it with seventy or eighty thousand soldiers, you will still worry about it.

不如取羽，全据长江，形势益张。”
不如攻取关羽，占据长江流域全境，形势就会更加壮大。”
It would be better to defeat Guan Yu and control the whole Changjiang River, which would make us even more powerful.”

权尤以此言为当。
孙权尤其认为吕蒙这段话十分得当。
Sun Quan realized this analysis was accurate. 

及蒙代肃，初至陆口，外倍修恩厚，与羽结好。
等到吕蒙接替鲁肃领兵，刚到陆口驻地的那段时间，他在表面上加倍体现出仁爱笃实，保持着与关羽间的友好往来。
Then Lü Meng succeeded to Lu Su’s position. After he arrived at Lukou, he demonstrated both his benevolence and honesty in order to maintain a friendly relation with Guan Yu.

后羽讨樊，留兵将备公安、南郡。
后来关羽征讨樊城，留下将士分别驻守公安和南郡。
Later Guan Yu went to attack Fancheng, and left a part of his troops to defend Gong’an and Nan Prefecture.

蒙上疏曰：“羽讨樊而多留备兵，必恐蒙图其后故也。蒙常有病，乞分士众还建业，以治疾为名。
吕蒙上疏说：“关羽讨伐樊城却留下不少守兵，必定是害怕我谋取他后方的缘故。我时常生病，请求带领部分人马跟我一起回建业，而以回去治病为幌子。
Lü Meng presented the memorial and said, “Guan Yu goes to attack Fancheng, and leaves a part of his troops to defend because he must be worried that we will attack him in the rear. I frequently fall ill, and plead for the division of a part of my troops to return to Jianye in search of treatment.

羽闻之，必撤备兵，尽赴襄阳。
关羽得到消息，必定会撤走守兵，全部开赴襄阳。
When Guan Yu hears the message, he will certainly use the reserve forces to strike Xiangyang with all his might. 

大军浮江，昼夜驰上，袭其空虚，则南郡可下而羽可擒也。”
届时我们的大军乘船走水路，昼夜逆流而上，袭取他的空虚所在，那么南郡可被攻克而关羽将成为我们的俘虏了。”
Our great armies will hurry day and night up along the Changjiang River. They will attack the weakly defended city, and then Nan Prefecture can be taken over so that Guan Yu can be caught.”

遂称病笃，权乃露檄召蒙还，阴与图计。
奏疏送走以后吕蒙便声称病情危重，孙权就发布公告召吕蒙回到建业，暗中与吕蒙商议计策。
Afterwards Lü Meng declared that he had developed a mortal illness. Sun Quan then issued an open edict to summon Lü Meng back, so that they could secretly plan the scheme of attack.

羽果信之，稍撤兵以赴樊。
关羽果真信而不疑，逐渐撤掉南郡的兵力开赴樊城。
Guan Yu, as anticipated, withdrew some of his troops to attack Fancheng.

魏使于禁救樊，羽尽擒禁等，人马数万，托以粮乏，擅取湘关米。
魏国派于禁救援樊城，关羽全部俘虏了于禁等人，人马多达数万，又以缺粮为借口，擅自取用湘关内属于吴国的粮食储备。
Wei State dispatched Yu Jin to rescue Fancheng. Guan Yu captured Yu Jin and all his army of several tens of thousands soldiers and horses. In the pretext of a shortage of food, Guan Yu fetched the rice which was being stored at Xiang Pass without permission.

权闻之，遂行，先遣蒙在前。
孙权听到这个消息，随即发兵，先派吕蒙在前先行。
Upon hearing the news, Sun Quan moved his troops and dispatched Lü Meng as a vanguard.

蒙至寻阳，尽伏其精兵艨艟中，使白衣摇橹，作商贾人服，昼夜兼行，至羽所置江边屯候，尽收缚之，是故羽不闻知。
吕蒙到了寻阳，将精兵全部埋伏在大船中，让人穿上白衣摇橹驾船，船里要露面的人都装扮成商人模样，昼夜兼程，来到关羽设置在江边的哨所，将防守士兵全部抓获捆绑起来，因此关羽没有听到丝毫风声。
When they arrived in Xunyang, Lü Meng hid all his crack troops in big ships. The rowers were in white, and those moving in the boats were in merchants’ clothes. The boats moved forward day and night. When they reached the riverside fortresses that Guan Yu constructed, they captured and bound all the sentries and soldiers, and because of this, Guan Yu was entirely unaware.

遂到南郡，士仁、麋芳皆降。
接着进军南郡，公安守将士仁、南郡太守麋芳先后投降。
Following this, the army arrived in Nan Prefecture where Shi Ren and Mi Fang both surrendered.

蒙入据城，尽得羽及将士家属，皆抚慰，约令军中不得干历人家，有所求取。
吕蒙进据江陵城，俘获了关羽及各部将的全部家眷，他都给予安抚慰问，同时明令军中不得干扰冒犯百姓，不能向百姓索取任何财物。
Lü Meng entered and stayed in Jiangling, where he captured all Guan Yu’s family members, generals and officers. He soothed and consoled them, ordering that military personnel should not bother or offend the common people, and shouldn’t demand anything.

蒙麾下士，是汝南人，取民家一笠，以覆官铠，官铠虽公，蒙犹以为犯军令，不可以乡里故而废法，遂垂涕斩之。
吕蒙部下一个兵士，是汝南人，拿了百姓家一顶斗笠，用来遮盖铠甲，铠甲虽然是公物，吕蒙依然认为这人违反了军令，不可以因为同乡的关系而废除法令，于是流着泪斩了犯法士兵。
One soldier of Runan under Lü Meng took a large bamboo hat from a folk’s house to cover the official armors. Although the official armors were public property, Lü Meng still insisted on his violating of the military order. He would not abolish the order even if the offender was his fellow villager. Tearfully, he put him to death.

于是军中震栗，道不拾遗。
于是军中震惊，做到了路不拾遗。
The whole army trembled with shock, and nobody dared to pick up anything dropped on the roads.

蒙旦暮使亲近存恤耆老，问所不足，疾病者给医药，饥寒者赐衣粮。
吕蒙早晚让身边亲近人员慰问抚恤老人，问他们缺少什么，有病的看病给药，饥寒的给予衣服粮食。
Lü Meng asked his close subordinates to console and soothe old people during the morning hours. At dusk, they went and asked them what they needed. Those who fell ill would receive treatment, while those in need were given clothes and food.

羽府藏财宝，皆封闭以待权至。
关羽府中所藏财宝，他也一概封存等待孙权到来处理。
The treasures hoarded in Guan Yu’s mansion were all sealed waiting for Sun Quan’s decision.

羽还，在道路，数使人与蒙相闻，蒙辄厚遇其使，周游城中，家家致问，或手书示信。
关羽返回，还在途中，就多次派人质问吕蒙，吕蒙总是优厚地接待关羽的使者，让他们周游城中，挨家挨户地询问情况，或者让蜀兵家人亲手写信以表示状况真实可靠。
When Guan Yu was on the way back, several times he sent messengers to get in contact with Lü Meng. Lü Meng treated all the messengers generously, allowing them to travel in the city and to visit each house in search of information. He made the family members of the Shu army write letters to confirm what was happening.

羽人还，私相参讯，咸知家门无恙，见待过于平时，故羽吏士无斗心。
关羽的使者返回后，将士们私下里互相探问，都知道自己家中平安无事，受到的待遇比平时更好，所以关羽的将士们都没有斗志。
After Guan Yu’s messengers returned, officers and soldiers privately inquired about each other. They all knew their families were safe and sound, and were even receiving better treatment than usual. This caused Guan Yu’s officers and soldiers to lose all their morale.

会权寻至，羽自知孤穷，乃走麦城，西至漳乡，众皆委羽而降。
恰好孙权紧跟着来到了江陵，关羽自知孤立危急，就逃奔麦城，再往西到了漳乡，手下将士都脱离关羽向吴军投降。
At this time, Sun Quan arrived in Jiangling, and Guan Yu was aware that he was isolated and in great danger, so he fled to Maicheng and then further west into Zhangxiang. His officers and soldiers all left Guan Yu and surrendered to the Wu army.

权使朱然、潘璋断其径路，即父子俱获，荆州遂定。
孙权派遣朱然、潘璋截断关羽西逃的必经之路，当即擒获关羽父子，荆州由此平定。
Sun Quan dispatched Zhu Ran and Pan Zhang to intercept GuanYu, knowing that there was only one road that he would be able to flee westward on. Guan Yu and his son were caught, and subsequently Jing Province settled itself in peace.

以蒙为南郡太守，封孱陵侯，赐钱一亿，黄金五百斤。
孙权任命吕蒙为南郡太守，封他为孱陵侯，赐钱一亿、黄金五百斤。
Sun Quan appointed Lü Meng prefect of Nan Prefecture, conferred on him Marquis of Chanling, and rewarded him with one hundred million coins and five hundred jin of gold.

蒙固辞金钱，权不许。
吕蒙坚决推辞所赐金钱，孙权不允许。
Lü Meng resolutely declined the money and gold, but Sun Quan did not accept his refusal.

封爵未下，会蒙疾发，权时在公安，迎置内殿，所以治护者万方，募封内有能愈蒙疾者，赐千金。
封爵令还没有下达，恰好吕蒙发病，孙权当时还在公安，就把吕蒙接到自己所住的内殿，用了各种方法给他诊治，招募国内有能治好吕蒙疾病者，将赏赐黄金一千斤。
Just before the announcement of the rewarding decree, Lü Meng fell ill. Sun Quan was in Gong’an at that time, so he had Lü Meng live in his inner palace, where his disease was treated with all means available. He searched for someone within the country to cure Lü Meng’s disease, offering one thousand jin of gold as a reward for curing him.

时有针加，权为之惨戚，欲数见其颜色，又恐劳动，常穿壁瞻之，见小能下食则喜，顾左右言笑，不然则咄唶，夜不能寐，病中瘳，为下赦令，群臣毕贺。
因时常要对吕蒙实施针灸治疗，孙权便为吕蒙所受痛苦而悲伤凄切，他很想尽可能多地看望吕蒙，又担心这样会使得吕蒙过分烦劳，为此他常在墙壁上凿洞观看他，见他稍微能够进食就感到高兴，对左右的人就有说有笑，如果吕蒙情况不佳就叹息不止，以至夜间不能安睡，当吕蒙病稍好一些，孙权就为他颁发赦令，群臣都来庆贺。
The frequent acupuncture treatment on Lü Meng caused him great pain, and Sun Quan felt miserable for Lü Meng’s sufferings. He had a strong desire to see more of Lü Meng but worried about disturbing him, so he often watched him through the holes in the wall. When he saw that Lü Meng was able to take a little food, he felt happier, laughing and talking to people close to him. When Lü Meng was not well, he would sigh and sigh, often unable to fall asleep at night. When Lü Meng was a little better, he issued an edict for him, so that all officials would come to express congratulations.

后更增笃，权自临视，命道士于星辰下为之请命。
后来吕蒙病情加重，孙权亲自到病榻前探望，命令道士在星辰下为吕蒙祈祷延寿。
Later Lü Meng’s disease became critical, so Sun Quan personally visited him in bed, and ordered Daoist disciples to pray for his longevity.

年四十二，遂卒于内殿。
四十二岁时，吕蒙病逝于内殿。
Lü Meng died of disease in the inner palace at the age of 42. 

时权哀痛甚，为之降损。
当时孙权极度悲痛，为他减乐损膳。
At that time Sun Quan was extremely depressed, cutting his diet and ending his musical entertainments in order to express his sadness.

蒙未死时，所得金宝诸赐尽付府藏，敕主者命绝之日皆上还，丧事务约。
吕蒙未死之前，将孙权赏赐给自己的金银珠宝全部交给府库收藏，命令主管人在他命绝之日全部上交，并嘱咐丧事务必简约。
Before his death, Lü Meng handed all the gold, silver and jewelry that Sun Quan had rewarded him over to the imperial treasury for preservation. He ordered the keeper to submit them all on the day of his death, and in his will, he requested a simple funeral.

权闻之，益以悲感。
孙权听说了这些事情，更加悲哀伤感。
After Sun Quan learned of this, he felt even more miserable.

蒙少不修书传，每陈大事，常口占为笺疏。
吕蒙年少时读书不多，每次陈述大事，常常口授书札和奏章。
Lü Meng read very little in his childhood. Each time he reported important matters, he often dictated his letters and memorials.

常以部曲事为江夏太守蔡遗所白，蒙无恨意。
他曾因部下的事情而被江夏太守蔡遗弹劾，吕蒙对他却并无怨恨之意。
He was often impeached by Cai Yi, prefect of Jiangxia, for matters involving Lü Meng’s subordinates, but Lü Meng had no resentment for him.

及豫章太守顾邵卒，权问所用，蒙因荐遗奉职佳吏，权笑曰：“君欲为祁奚邪？”
到豫章太守顾邵去世，孙权询问吕蒙该用谁接任，吕蒙因而举荐蔡遗说这是个奉行职事的好官，孙权笑着说：“您是想作祁奚吗？”
When the prefect of Yuzhang Gu Shao died, Sun Quan asked Lü Meng who should be his successor. Lü Meng recommended Cai Yi and praised him as a good official who was faithful to his duty. Sun Quan laughed, “Do you want to be Qi Xi?” 

于是用之。
于是任用蔡遗。
He then appointed Cai Yi.

甘宁粗暴好杀，既常失蒙意，又时违权令，权怒之，蒙辄陈请：“天下未定，斗将如宁难得，宜容忍之。”
甘宁脾气粗暴喜欢杀人，既常常使吕蒙不满意，又时常违背孙权的命令，孙权对他很是恼火，吕蒙每每向孙权陈述求情说：“天下还没有平定，甘宁这样的战将很难得，应该宽容他。”
Gan Ning was hot-tempered and liked killing. He not only caused dissatisfaction of Lü Meng, but violated Sun Quan’s orders. Sun Quan was very much annoyed. Each time Lü Meng pleaded for him, “The whole land has not settled down in peace. A war general like Gan Ning is difficult to find. You should forgive him.”

权遂厚宁，卒得其用。
孙权于是厚待甘宁，终于发挥了他的作用。
 After that, Sun Quan treated Gan Ning generously and in the end enjoyed his devotion.

蒙子霸袭爵，与守冢三百家，复田五十顷。
吕蒙的儿子吕霸承袭爵位，孙权又赐给守墓人三百家，及全免租税的田地五十顷。
Lü Meng’s son, Lü Ba inherited the rank of nobility, and was bestowed on three hundred households to protect Lü Meng’s tomb and, in addition, five thousand *mu* of fields free of taxes. 

霸卒，兄琮袭侯。
吕霸去世，由他的哥哥吕琮承袭侯爵。
After Lü Ba died, his elder brother Lü Cong inherited the noble rank of marquis. 

琮卒，弟睦嗣。
吕琮去世，弟弟吕睦继承爵位。
After the death of Lü Cong, his younger brother Lü Mu succeeded to his title.

孙权与陆逊论周瑜、鲁肃及蒙曰：“公瑾雄烈，胆略兼人，遂破孟德，开拓荆州，邈焉难继，君今继之。
孙权跟陆逊评论周瑜、鲁肃和吕蒙时说：“周瑜勇武刚烈，胆识谋略远超常人，因而能够击垮曹操，开拓荆州，他的超卓高妙的确很难有人步其后尘，而您现在继承了他。
Sun Quan once commented on Zhou Yu, Lu Su and Lü Meng in his talk with Lu Xun. He said, “Gongjin is powerful and upright. His courage and resourcefulness are extraordinary. That is why he could defeat Cao Mengde and seize Jing Province. His superiority will make it hard for others to follow in his steps, and now you succeed him.

公瑾昔要子敬来东，致达于孤，孤与宴语，便及大略帝王之业，此一快也。
周瑜过去邀请鲁肃来到东吴，把他引见给我，我和他对饮交谈，他一开始就提出了建立帝王之业的远大谋略，这是第一件快事。
Gongjin in the past invited Zijing to the east and introduced him to me. At the banquet when I talked to him, he immediately put forward the ambitious strategy of establishing an empire. That is the first delightful experience in my life.

后孟德因获刘琮之势，张言方率数十万众水步俱下。
后来曹操因为得到投降者刘琮原有的军事实力，扬言要率领数十万大军由水陆两路一起东下。
Later Cao Mengde obtained Liu Cong’s military forces, and claimed that he was leading several hundred thousand infantry and navy forces to march toward the south. 

孤普请诸将，咨问所宜，无適先对，至子布、文表，俱言宜遣使修檄迎之，子敬即驳言不可，劝孤急呼公瑾，付任以众，逆而击之。此二快也。
我广请诸将，咨询该用何种合宜的策略应对，诸将无非拿些权宜行事之类的话先应付搪塞，到了张子布、文表，两人都说应该派使者送降书迎接曹操，鲁肃当即反驳说不可那样，劝我火速召回周瑜，委以统帅重任，前去迎击曹操，这是第二大快事。
I consulted all the generals about the proper strategies of a response, and at first there were no appropriate suggestions. As to Zhang Zibu and Wen Biao, both said we should dispatch an envoy to send our surrendering instrument to Cao Cao. Lu Su refuted the idea at once, persuaded me to summon Zhou Yu immediately, and to appoint him as the general commander to deal a head-on blow to Cao Cao. This is the second delightful experience in my life.


且其决计策，意出张、苏远矣；后虽劝吾借玄德地，是其一短，不足以损其二长也。
而且他所谋定的计策方略，见解远远超过了张仪、苏秦；后来虽然劝我把荆州借给刘备，是他的一大失误，但不足以损害他的两大长处。
His strategy and decisions were far superior to those by Zhang Yi and Su Qin. Later he persuaded me to lend Jingzhou City to Liu Bei. This is where he fell short, but it does not take away from his two long-sighted stratagems.

周公不求备于一人，故孤忘其短而贵其长，常以比方邓禹也。
周公对人不求全责备，所以我也忘掉他的短处而敬重他的长处，常把他比为邓禹。
Duke Zhou did not demand perfection of others, therefore, I will forget his short-sighted mistake and cherish in memory his two long-sighted stratagems. I have often compared him to Deng Yu.

又子明少时，孤谓不辞剧易，果敢有胆而已；及身长大，学问开益，筹略奇至，可以次于公瑾，但言议英发不及之耳。
再者吕蒙年少时，我只认为他不惧艰难，果敢而有胆量而已；到他长大以后，学问增益，运筹谋略出奇至极，可以说是仅次于周瑜，只是言谈显示的才华横溢赶不上周瑜而已。
As for Lü Ziming, as a teenager he had courage and resolution, and feared no hardships. As he became an adult, his knowledge and ability increased, and his schemes and stratagems were often extraordinary. It is possible that he is only second to Zhou Gongjin, but his oration and intelligence are no match.

图取关羽，胜于子敬。
谋划攻取关羽，他又胜于鲁肃。
He did better work than Lu Zijing when it came to planning and capturing Guan Yu.

子敬答孤书云：‘帝王之起，皆有驱除，羽不足忌。’此子敬内不能办，外为大言耳，孤亦恕之，不苟责也。
鲁肃在给我的回信中说：‘帝王的兴起，都有人为他清除障碍，关羽不值得顾忌。’这是鲁肃内心明知他无能为力，表面上又夸大其词罢了，我也原谅了他，不随便加以责备。
Zijing in his reply to my letter said, ‘Any emperor in his rise usually has some pawns, but Guan Yu is not strong enough to be dreaded.’ This simply indicated that Lu Zijing was aware that he would not be able to eliminate Guan Yu, but he put up a strong facade where he exaggerated greatly his abilities. I forgave him for this, and did not excoriate him.

然其作军，屯营不失，令行禁止，部界无废负，路无拾遗，其法亦美也。”
然而他治理军队，屯营从没丢过，能做到令行禁止，辖区内没有旷废职守之过，路不拾遗，他的法度也是很完善的。”
Nevertheless, in his administration of the army, he never lost his military campsites or towns, and had a strict enforcement of the orders and prohibitions. There was no absence or refusal in execution of duties in his controlled areas, and no one picked up what was dropped on the road. The laws and regulations he established were perfect.”