周瑜字公瑾，庐江舒人也。从祖父景，景子忠，皆为汉太尉。父异，洛阳令。
周瑜字公瑾，庐江郡舒县人。堂祖父周景，以及周景的儿子周忠，都做过汉朝的太尉。父亲周异，曾任洛阳县令。
Zhou Yu, also known as Gongjin, was a native of Shu in Lujiang. His grandfather’s elder brother Zhou Jing, and Zhou Jing’s son, Zhou Zhong, were once both marshals of the Han Dynasty. His father Zhou Yi once served as magistrate of Luoyang.

瑜长壮有姿貌。初，孙坚兴义兵讨董卓，徙家于舒。坚子策与瑜同年，独相友善，瑜推道南大宅以舍策，升堂拜母，有无通共。
周瑜身高体壮而容貌英俊。当初，孙坚组织义兵讨伐董卓，把家迁到了舒县。孙坚的儿子孙策与周瑜同年，两人之间建立起了很好的关系，周瑜把大路南边的一座大宅院让给孙策居住，还常去后堂拜见孙策的母亲，各种生活用品也都互通有无，共同享用。
Zhou Yu was handsome with a robust constitution as an adult. At first, Sun Jian initiated his righteous force against Dong Zhuo, and moved his family to Shu. His son, Sun Ce was the same age as Zhou Yu, and they shared a special friendship. Zhou Yu offered Sun Ce’s family a big mansion on the southern side of the big road, and often paid respectful visits to Sun Ce’s mother in the back hall. Both families shared all daily necessities and exchanged many needed goods.

瑜从父尚为丹杨太守，瑜往省之。会策将东渡，到历阳，驰书报瑜，瑜将兵迎策。策大喜曰：“吾得卿，谐也。”遂从攻横江、当利，皆拔之。
周瑜的叔父周尚任丹杨太守，周瑜去看望他。孙策恰在这时准备渡江东向，他到了历阳，就写信通知周瑜，周瑜带兵迎接孙策。孙策高兴无比地对周瑜说：“得到你，大事就能成功了。”于是周瑜就跟随孙策去攻打横江、当利，都攻克了。
Zhou Yu’s uncle, his father’s younger brother, Zhou Shang was the prefect of Danyang, and Zhou Yu once paid a visit to him. When Sun Ce was going east to cross the Changjiang River, upon arriving at Liyang, he sent an urgent letter to notify Zhou Yu. Zhou Yu immediately headed his troops out to meet him. Sun Ce was greatly pleased and said, “Because I have you, the great cause will surely succeed.” Zhou Yu followed Sun Ce to attack Hengjiang and Dangli, and the enemies were all defeated.

乃渡江击秣陵，破笮融、薛礼，转下湖孰、江乘，进入曲阿，刘繇奔走，而策之众已数万矣。
接着又渡江进攻秣陵，打垮了笮融、薛礼，转攻湖孰、江乘，进入曲阿，刘繇败走，这时孙策的人马已发展到了几万人了。
Afterwards, they crossed the Changjiang River to attack Moling. They defeated Ze Rong and Xue Li, and took over Hushu and Jiangcheng. They entered Qu’e, and Liu You was defeated. He was able to escape. At this time, Sun Ce possessed troops of several ten thousand people.

因谓瑜曰：“吾以此众取吴会平山越已足。卿还镇丹杨。”瑜还。
孙策对周瑜说：“我用这几万人马攻取吴郡和会稽郡，及平定山越，都已经绰绰有余了。你还是回去镇守丹杨吧。”周瑜因此返回丹杨。
and so he said to Zhou Yu, “It is enough for me to lead the forces to take over Wu Prefecture and Kuaiji, as well as suppress the Yue tribes in the mountains. You still return to defend Danyang.” Zhou Yu went back.

顷之，袁术遣从弟胤代尚为太守，而瑜与尚俱还寿春。
不久，袁术派他堂弟袁胤替代周尚任丹杨太守，这样周瑜和周尚便都回到了寿春。
and soon Yuan Shu appointed his cousin Yuan Yin to replace Zhou Shang as prefect. Zhou Yu and his uncle Zhou Shang both returned to Shouchun.

术欲以瑜为将，瑜观术终无所成，故求为居巢长，欲假涂东归，术听之。遂自居巢还吴。是岁，建安三年也。
袁术想要任命周瑜为部将，但周瑜考察分析袁术最终不会有什么成就，所以只请求担任居巢县长，目的是想借道回归江东，袁术同意了他的请求。周瑜便经居巢回到了吴郡。这一年，是建安三年。
Yuan Shu wanted to appoint Zhou Yu as his general, but Zhou Yu believed that Yuan Shu would not succeed in the end. Because of this, he asked to be appointed as the magistrate of Juchao, wanting to return to the east. Yuan Shu agreed, so Zhou Yu returned to Wu Prefecture from Juchao. This year was the third year in the Jian’an Period.

策亲自迎瑜，授建威中郎将，即与兵二千人，骑五十匹。
孙策亲自迎接周瑜，任命他为建威中郎将，当即派给他二千步兵和五十名骑兵。
Sun Ce welcomed Zhou Yu personally and, appointed him as power-building royal general, immediately gave him two thousand infantry soldiers and fifty cavalrymen.

瑜时年二十四，吴中皆呼为周郎。
周瑜这时才二十四岁，吴郡的人都称呼他为周郎。
At this time, Zhou Yu was 24 years old, and the people in Wu Prefecture all called him “Handsome Zhou”.

以瑜恩信著于庐江，出备牛渚，后领春谷长。
孙策因为周瑜的恩德信义名震庐江，便派他防守牛渚，后又兼任春谷县长。
Because Zhou Yu had gained wide fame in Lujiang for his virtues and faithfulness, Sun Ce dispatched him to defend Niuzhu, and later appointed him magistrate of Chungu.

顷之，策欲取荆州，以瑜为中护军，领江夏太守，从攻皖，拔之。
不久，孙策打算攻取荆州，命周瑜为中护军，兼任江夏太守。周瑜跟随孙策攻打皖县，攻克。
Soon Sun Ce planned to attack Jing Province, and so he appointed Zhou Yu as royal guard commander and acting prefect of Jiangxia. Zhou Yu followed Sun Ce to attack Wan, and they seized it.

时得桥公两女，皆国色也。策自纳大桥，瑜纳小桥。
这时得到桥公两个女儿，都是天姿国色的美人。孙策自己娶了大桥，周瑜娶了小桥。
At this time, they won the heart of the two daughters of the respectful Mr. Qiao, who were both national beauties. Sun Ce himself married the elder Qiao, and Zhou Yu married the younger Qiao.

复进寻阳，破刘勋，讨江夏，还定豫章、庐陵，留镇巴丘。
接着又进军寻阳，打垮了刘勋，讨伐江夏郡，回兵时又平定了豫章、庐陵二郡，周瑜则奉命留守巴丘。
They again attacked Xunyang, defeated Liu Xun, attacked Jiangxia, and on their way back, they took over Yuzhang and Luling. Finally, Zhou Yu stationed his troops in Baqiu.

五年，策薨，权统事。瑜将兵赴丧，遂留吴，以中护军与长史张昭共掌众事。
建安五年，孙策去世，由孙权统管政务。周瑜领兵前来吊唁，就此留在吴郡，以中护军身份与长史张昭共同执掌军政大事。
In the fifth year, Sun Ce demised. Sun Quan succeeded to his seat of power. Zhou Yu headed his soldiers to attend the funeral, and afterwards he stayed in Wu as the royal guard commander, a position in which he shared the administration with Chief Historian Zhang Zhao.

十一年，督孙瑜等讨麻、保二屯，枭其渠帅，囚俘万余口，还备宫亭。
建安十一年，他统领孙瑜等将征讨麻、保二屯，将这二个屯营的首领斩首，俘虏了一万多人，然后回兵驻防宫亭。
In the eleventh year, Zhou Yu supervised Sun Yu et al. to attack the Ma and Bao camps, where they cut off the heads of the commanders and captured over ten thousand soldiers before returning to be stationed at Gongting.

江夏太守黄祖遣将邓龙将兵数千人入柴桑，瑜追讨击，生虏龙送吴。
江夏太守黄祖派部将邓龙带领几千人马进入柴桑，周瑜追击，将邓龙活捉送往吴郡。
Huang Zu, prefect of Jiangxia, dispatched his general Deng Long with several thousand soldiers into Chaisang. Zhou Yu pursued after them, caught Deng Long alive and sent him to Wu.

十三年春，权讨江夏，瑜为前部大督。
建安十三年春，孙权讨伐江夏郡，周瑜担任前部大都督。
In the spring of the thirteenth year, Sun Quan went to attack Jiangxia and appointed Zhou Yu as a great commander of the front army.

其年九月，曹公入荆州，刘琮举众降，曹公得其水军、船，步兵数十万，将士闻之皆恐。
这年九月，曹操进入荆州，刘琮率众投降，曹操得到了他的水军和舟船，步兵则多达几十万人，东吴将士听说后都非常惊恐。
In the ninth lunar month of that year, Lord Cao entered Jing Province, and Liu Cong surrendered with his people. Lord Cao took control of his navy and boats, and several hundred thousand infantry soldiers. Generals and soldiers in Wu State all fell into panic when they heard the news.

权延见群下，问以计策。
孙权召集众部下，询问对策。
Sun Quan summoned his subordinates to consult them for stratagems.

议者咸曰：“曹公豺虎也，然托名汉相，挟天子以征四方，动以朝廷为辞，今日拒之，事更不顺。
议论的人都说：“曹操如豺虎一般凶狠残暴，但他凭借汉朝丞相的名义，挟制天子来征伐四方，动辄以朝廷旨意为借口，如今若是跟他抗衡，事情就将变得更加不利于我们。
All of them stated, “Lord Cao is a jackal or a tiger. He, in the name of the prime minister of the Han Dynasty, holds the Son of Heaven under duress and goes on punitive expeditions to the four sides of the country. He has behaved recklessly on the pretext of the royal decrees. Now if we confront him, the situations will become even more difficult.

且将军大势可以拒操者，长江也。
况且将军您大体可以跟曹操一决高下的优势，无非是长江天险。
Moreover, the biggest advantage you, General, can rely on to resist Cao Cao is the Changjiang River.

今操得荆州，奄有其地，刘表治水军，蒙冲斗舰，乃以千数，操悉浮以沿江，兼有步兵，水陆俱下，此为长江之险，已与我共之矣。
而今曹操已经取得荆州，那里全都在他的控制之下，加上刘表昔日所训练的水军，以及数以千计的蒙冲战舰，曹操将战舰全部沿江摆开，加上步兵，水陆两条战线同时沿江东下，这就意味着长江这一天险，曹操已是跟我们共同所有了。
Now Cao Cao has got hold of Jing Province and has complete control of the land. Liu Biao built a navy with over one thousand fast charging boats and big warships. If Cao Cao lines all the warships and boats on the Changjiang River along with the infantry, then the two armies will march together to the east along the river. This means we will actually share this natural barrier with Cao Cao.

而势力众寡，又不可论。
而敌我实力之间的众寡差别，又实在不能相提并论。
Furthermore, there is a great difference in strength between the two sides, and we are not on a par with their strengths.

愚谓大计不如迎之。”
因此我们的最佳选择莫过于向他投降。”
Because of this disparity of strengths, we humbly suggest that it is better to welcome him.”

瑜曰：“不然。操虽托名汉相，其实汉贼也。
周瑜说：“不对。曹操虽然假借汉朝丞相的名义，其实是汉廷的盗贼。
Zhou Yu opposed, “No! Although Cao Cao is in the name of the prime minister of the Han Dynasty, in reality, he is the usurper of the Han Dynasty.

将军以神武雄才，兼仗父兄之烈，割据江东，地方数千里，兵精足用，英雄乐业，尚当横行天下，为汉家除残去秽。
将军您凭借英明威武和雄才大略，加上依仗着父兄的赫赫功业，割据江东，土地方圆几千里，兵马精良而财用富足，境内英雄又都在愉快地从事本业，本当横行天下，为汉廷铲除奸邪祸害。
General, you are talented in military power and strategy. You have succeeded to the cause which has been created by your father and brother, and you rule the east areas of the Changjiang River. This state is several thousand square li, with the armies strong and capable of defending the territory, and with an abundant amount of food and other plentiful resources sufficient enough for use. Heroes within the territory enjoy their own professions, and are able to gallop throughout the land eliminating the dirty evils for the Han Dynasty.

况操自送死，而可迎之邪？
况且曹操自己前来送死，怎么可以去向他投降呢？
Moreover, Cao Cao is seeking his own death. Why should we welcome him?

请为将军筹之：今使北土已安，操无内忧，能旷日持久，来争疆埸，又能与我校胜负于船楫，可也；
请让我为您分析谋划一下：即使现在北方的局势已经完全稳定，曹操毫无后顾之忧，能做到旷日持久，不惜跟我们胶着于这片战场之上，并且还能够跟我们的水军一决雌雄，姑且可以说他胜算较大；
Please allow me to analyze for you, General: In case that the northern territory settled itself in peace and Cao Cao had no internal worries, he could sustain a protracted war in order to compete with us for this part of the territory, and battle against us with his boats and warships. Indeed, he could.

今北土既未平安，加马超、韩遂尚在关西为操后患；
可惜目前北方并没有形成平静安定的局面，加上马超、韩遂还在关西威胁着曹操的后方；
However, the reality is that the northern territory is not settled in peace, and additionally, Ma Chao and Han Sui are still causing troubles in Guanxi in the rear of Cao Cao.

且舍鞍马，仗舟楫，与吴越争衡，本非中国所长；
况且舍弃骑兵，凭借舟船，来跟熟悉水战的吴越较量，这本来就不是曹军的长处；
Nevertheless, depending on ships instead of horses in competition with the Wu and Yue armies is not an advantage for the armies from the Central Plains.

又今盛寒，马无藁草，驱中国士众远涉江湖之间，不习水土，必生疾病：
再者当前天气严寒，军马缺乏草料，驱使中原大军远涉南方的江河湖泊，水土不服，必然发生疾病：
Now it is the coldest season in the year, and there is no fodder for the horses. Cao's troops, crossing lakes and rivers, are certainly not acclimatized to the southern areas, and will undoubtedly fall ill.

此数四者，用兵之患也，而操皆冒行之。
这四个方面，都是用兵大忌，而曹操却全都贸然施行了。
These four aspects are usually avoided as taboos when maneuvering troops, but Cao Cao is operating against them all.

将军擒操，宜在今日。
将军想要活捉曹操，眼下正是最佳时机。
It is suitable for you, General, to catch Cao Cao this time.

瑜请得精兵三万人，进住夏口，保为将军破之。”
我请求率领精兵三万，进驻夏口，保证为将军击破曹操。”
I, Zhou Yu, plead with you to allow me to lead thirty thousand crack troops to be stationed in Xiakou. This will guarantee a defeat of Cao Cao for you, General.”

权曰：“老贼欲废汉自立久矣，徒忌二袁、吕布、刘表与孤耳。今数雄已灭，惟孤尚存，孤与老贼，势不两立。君言当击，甚与孤合，此天以君授孤也。”
孙权说：“曹操这老贼想废除汉帝自己登极的图谋已经很有了一些时日了，只是顾忌袁绍和袁术、吕布、刘表和我这几个人罢了。现在那几个人都已被他消灭了，只有我还在，我跟那老贼，势不两立。您说应当抗击，与我的想法非常一致，这是上天派您来帮助我。”
Sun Quan was excited and responded, “It has been a long time since this old rascal has dreamt about dethroning the Han Dynasty and declaring the throne for himself. He only dreads the two Yuans, Lü Bu, Liu Biao and I. Now that the other heroes have all been wiped out, only I have survived, alive and alone. This old rascal and I are both antagonistic. You say we should strike him, and I find this very agreeable. It is as if the heavens have bestowed you on me.”

时刘备为曹公所破，欲引南渡江，与鲁肃遇于当阳，遂共图计，因进住夏口，遣诸葛亮诣权。
当时刘备被曹操击垮，打算向南撤退渡过大江，与鲁肃在当阳相遇，于是共同商议对付曹操的计策，然后也乘便进驻夏口，派诸葛亮前去拜见孙权。
At that time Liu Bei was defeated by Lord Cao, intending to lead his army south to cross the Changjiang River. He met Lu Su at Dangyang, and thereupon they planned a stratagem together. Afterwards, Liu Bei stationed his troops in Xiakou and dispatched Zhuge Liang to visit Sun Quan.

权遂遣瑜及程普等与备并力逆曹公，遇于赤壁。
孙权当下便派周瑜、程普等将与刘备合力迎击曹操，两军在赤壁相遇。
Sun Quan dispatched Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu and others to join forces with Liu Bei against Lord Cao at Chibi.

时曹公军众已有疾病，初一交战，公军败退，引次江北。瑜等在南岸。
此时曹操大军中已有人染上疾病，刚一交战，曹军就败退了，退到江北驻军。周瑜等人驻军南岸。
At that time, some of Lord Cao’s soldiers already contracted diseases. In the first battle, Lord Cao’s army met defeat and withdrew to be stationed at the northern side of the river. Zhou Yu and others were on the southern side of the river.

瑜部将黄盖曰：“今寇众我寡，难与持久。然观操军方连船舰，首尾相接，可烧而走也。”
周瑜的部将黄盖说：“如今敌众我寡，难以与他们长久相持。我观察到曹军正在连接战舰，使它们首尾相连，可用火攻的办法彻底击退他们。”
General Huang Gai under Zhou Yu suggested, “Now the enemy is overwhelming in number, and it is difficult for us to confront them for an extended period of time. However, I have observed that Cao Cao’s army connected heads of the warships with the tails, so we can burn them and run away.”

乃取蒙冲斗舰数十艘，实以薪草，膏油灌其中，裹以帷幕，上建牙旗，先书报曹公，欺以欲降。
周瑜依计调来蒙冲战舰几十艘，船舱内塞满柴草，在其中浇上膏油，用帷幕遮盖伪装，上面立起主将大旗，先让黄盖写信给曹操，欺骗说准备向他投降。
Thus Zhou Yu prepared tens of fast charging warships, filled them with dried wood and grass, and poured grease and oil into them, covering them with heavy curtains and erecting commanding banners. He asked Huang Gai to write a letter to Cao Cao beforehand, pretending to surrender.

又豫备走舸，各系大船后，因引次俱前。
又预备了轻便快速的小船，分别系在大船后面，然后依次同时前进。
Again he prepared the fast boats, by fastening them behind the big ships. When the warships moved forward in succession.

曹公军吏士皆延颈观望，指言盖降。
曹军官兵都伸长了脖子在北岸观看，指点着船队说黄盖投降来了。
Lord Cao’s military leaders and soldiers stretched their necks to watch, pointing to the warships, and saying that Huang Gai was coming to surrender.

盖放诸船，同时发火。时风盛猛，悉延烧岸上营落。
黄盖等到距离已近便命令放开所有大船，各船同时点火。当时风势极其猛烈，大火全都蔓延烧到了岸上的曹军营寨。
Approaching Cao Cao’s campsites, Huang Gai ordered his troops to set free the big ships and ignite them at the same time. At that moment, the strong winds were blowing hard, and the fire spread to the campsites on the bank.

顷之，烟炎张天，人马烧溺死者甚众，军遂败退，还保南郡。
顷刻之间，浓烟与火光冲天而起，曹军人马被烧死淹死的不计其数，曹军于是败退，回师保守南郡。
Soon, fire and smoke permeated in the sky, men and horses were burnt to death or drowned while trying to escape. The army was defeated and withdrew to defend Nan Prefecture. 

备与瑜等复共追。
刘备和周瑜等人又合力追击。
Liu Bei and Zhou Yu again chased after them. 

曹公留曹仁等守江陵城，径自北归。
曹操留下曹仁等人驻守江陵城，自己则径直返回北方去了。
Lord Cao left Cao Ren and others to defend Jiangling, and then made a direct return to the north.

瑜与程普又进南郡，与仁相对，各隔大江。
周瑜和程普又进军南郡，与曹仁隔江对峙。
Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu again marched to Nan Prefecture where they were confronted by Cao Ren across the Changjiang River.

兵未交锋，瑜即遣甘宁前据夷陵。
两军还没有交战，周瑜就派甘宁前去占据了夷陵。
Before the battle, Zhou Yu dispatched Gan Ning as a vanguard to be stationed at Yiling.

仁分兵骑别攻围宁。
曹仁抽调出一部分步兵和骑兵攻打甘宁。
Cao Ren divided his troops and cavalrymen to attack and surround Gan Ning. 

宁告急于瑜，瑜用吕蒙计，留凌统以守其后，身与蒙上救宁。
甘宁向周瑜告急，周瑜采用吕蒙的计策，留下凌统镇守后方，他亲自和吕蒙一起到上游解救甘宁。
Gan Ning reported the emergency to Zhou Yu. Zhou Yu adopted Lü Meng’s stratagem, deciding that he and Lü Meng would go to rescue Gan Ning, leaving Ling Tong to guard the rear.

宁围既解，乃渡屯北岸，克期大战。
甘宁的围困一被解除，周瑜即部署诸军过江驻扎于北岸，约定日期与曹仁决战。
After the siege was raised, Gan Ning crossed the Changjiang River, stationed his troops on the northern riverside, and waited for the start of a big battle.

瑜亲跨马拆陈，会流矢中右胁，疮甚，便还。
周瑜亲自骑马掠阵，恰被流箭射中右胸，伤势非常严重，只好退回军营中。
Zhou Yu was charging forward on horseback when a stray arrow suddenly hit him in his right side. He was seriously wounded and went back immediately.

后仁闻瑜卧未起，勒兵就陈。
曹仁得悉周瑜卧床不起，便挥兵排阵挑战。
Later, Cao Ren heard that Zhou Yu was lying in bed unable to get up, so he commanded his troops to demonstrate the fight formation. 

瑜乃自舆案行军营，激扬吏士，仁由是遂退。
周瑜便带伤坐着小车巡视军营，激励鼓舞官兵士气，曹仁因此退走。
Upon learning of this, Zhou Yu drove in his carriage to patrol the camps, so as to encourage his commanders and soldiers. Cao Ren thus retreated.

权拜瑜偏将军，领南郡太守。
孙权委任周瑜为偏将军，兼任南郡太守。以下隽、汉昌、刘阳、州陵四县作为周瑜的奉邑，屯兵驻守江陵。
Sun Quan appointed Zhou Yu wing general and acting prefect of Nan Prefecture with the four counties of Xiajun, Hanchang, Liuyang and Zhouling as his emoluments. Zhou Yu stationed his troops at Jiangling.

刘备以左将军领荆州牧，治公安。
刘备当时以左将军的身份兼任荆州牧，治所设在公安。
Liu Bei was appointed left general and acting governor of Jing Province, and his administration office was established in Gong’an.

备诣京见权，瑜上疏曰：“刘备以枭雄之姿，而有关羽、张飞熊虎之将，必非久屈为人用者。
刘备到京口见孙权，周瑜上疏说：“刘备本人骁勇雄豪，而又有关羽、张飞这样猛如熊虎的大将，他一定不会长久屈服为人
Liu Bei paid a visit to Sun Quan at Jingkou. Zhou Yu wrote a memorial and said, “Liu Bei is a man of valor and ambition. He has commanded over the two great generals of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, like a bear and a tiger. Without a doubt, he would never lower himself to serve others.

愚谓大计宜徙备置吴，盛为筑宫室，多其美女玩好，以娱其耳目，分此二人，各置一方，使如瑜者得挟与攻战，大事可定也。
我认为现在的合适策略是将刘备迁往吴郡，替他大修豪华住宅，多送给他一些美女宝玩，使他的视听沉迷于声色之中，再把关羽和张飞分开，各处一方，让像我这样的人挟制他们参与征战，大事就可以定了。
I suggest that for the success of your great cause, it would be better to shift him to Wu Prefecture, constructing palaces for him there and providing him with beauties and playthings to entertain him in sight and sound. I also recommend separating Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, allowing each to live in a different place, and dispatching someone as me to control their fighting. Our great plan can be settled upon in this way.

今猥割土地以资业之，聚此三人，俱在疆埸，恐蛟龙得云雨，终非池中物也。”
如今轻率地割让土地来资助他们，让这三个人聚在一起，又都身处战场，只怕将来他会像蛟龙得到云雨，终究不是池中之物啊。”
Today we make rash divisions of the land to humbly provide them with resources, and the three men will fight for a long time together in the battlefield. I am afraid they are just like flood dragons playing in clouds and rain, and in the end, they will not stay in a pond. "

权以曹公在北方，当广揽英雄，又恐备难卒制，故不纳。
孙权因为曹操在北方虎视眈眈，应当广泛招揽英雄豪杰，再者也担心刘备并非一朝一夕之间可以制服，所以没有采用周瑜的意见。
Sun Quan thought that with Lord Cao already gaining influence in the north, he would attract a wide range of heroes; on the other hand, he was also apprehensive that it would be difficult to control Liu Bei with such a short time frame. Because of this apprehension, he did not implement the suggestion.

是时刘璋为益州牧，外有张鲁寇侵，瑜乃诣京见权曰：
此时刘璋担任益州牧，外有张鲁经常入境侵扰掠夺，周瑜便来到京口觐见孙权说：
At this time, Liu Zhang was the governor of Yi Province, which was constantly invaded by Zhang Lu. Zhou Yu went to Jingkou to see Sun Quan, and suggested,

“今曹操新折衄，方忧在腹心，未能与将军连兵相事也。
“如今曹操刚刚战败，正忧虑变乱自内部发生，不能跟将军您对阵交战了。
"Now Cao Cao has just suffered a setback, and the internal troubles still worry him. Consequently, he cannot confront you for another campaign.

乞与奋威俱进取蜀，得蜀而并张鲁，因留奋威固守其地，好与马超结援。
请允许我和奋威将军一道进取蜀地，占领蜀地后再吞并张鲁，然后留下奋威将军在蜀中坚守，以便跟马超结成联盟。
Please allow Power-inspiring General and me to advance together into Shu. After the conquest of Shu and the incorporation of Zhang Lu's army, Power-inspiring General will be stationed there for the convenience of forming an alliance with Ma Chao.

瑜还与将军据襄阳以蹙操，北方可图也。”
我从那边返回再与将军占据襄阳以使曹操日益窘困，北方就可以谋取了。”
I will return to station my troops in Xiangyang in hopes of making more troubles for Cao Cao and then conquering the north."

权许之。瑜还江陵为行装，而道于巴丘病卒，时年三十六。
孙权同意了这个计划。周瑜折回江陵准备行装，然而却在途经巴丘时因病去世，时年三十六岁。
Sun Quan gave his permission. Zhou Yu went back to Jiangling to prepare, but he died unexpectedly after contracting a disease on his way to Baqiu. He was only 36.

权素服举哀，感恸左右。丧当还吴，又迎之芜湖，众事费度，一为供给。后著令曰：“故将军周瑜、程普，其有人客，皆不得问。”
孙权穿上丧服为周瑜举哀，感伤哀痛影响到了身边所有亲近。当周瑜的灵柩要运回吴郡时，孙权又亲自到芜湖迎接，举办丧事的所有费用，也一概下令供给。后来又发布书面命令说：“已故将军周瑜、程普，这两家若有佃客，一律免除他们的赋税徭役。”
Sun Quan mourned over Zhou Yu by wearing the funeral robe, an act that brought people close to him for support. Zhou Yu's coffin was sent back to Wu, so Sun Quan again greeted it in Wuhu, and provided for all the expenses. Later he issued an edict: "If there are renters working for the families of the departed generals Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu, they should not be asked to pay taxes."

初瑜见友于策，太妃又使权以兄奉之。
当初周瑜得到孙策友好相待，孙策的母亲又让孙权以兄长之礼尊奉他。
At first Zhou Yu made friends with Sun Ce. Sun Ce's mother, the imperial concubine of the late emperor, asked Sun Quan to treat him as his elder brother. 

是时权位为将军，诸将宾客为礼尚简，而瑜独先尽敬，便执臣节。
那时孙权的职位还只是将军，他的礼节还比较随易简单，而周瑜独独率先对他竭尽敬意，习惯于遵循臣子的礼节。
At that time, Sun Quan was only a general. Generals and other guests treated Sun Quan with simple etiquette, while only Zhou Yu treated him with extreme politeness, as he was accustomed to the proprieties of being a subordinate. 

性度恢廓，大率为得人，惟与程普不睦。
周瑜的性情气度宽宏大量，大体上很得人心，只跟程普不很和睦。
Zhou Yu's temperament was magnanimous in nature, and on the whole, he won the confidence and support of the people. He was only unfriendly with Cheng Pu.

瑜少精意于音乐，虽三爵之后，其有阙误，瑜必知之，知之必顾，故时人谣曰：“曲有误，周郎顾。”
周瑜年少时曾精心钻研过音乐，即使酒过数巡之后，演奏者有些小小差错，周瑜也必定不会漏过，他一知道就必定会回头注视，所以当时有人编了歌谣说：“曲有误，周郎顾。”
At an early age, Zhou Yu studied music and became a musical expert. Even after several rounds of drink, if there was a mistake in a musical performance, Zhou Yu was sure to know it. And when he found such mistakes in performances, he would without a doubt turn his head around for a look. Because of this habit, a contemporary sang a ballad that said, "An error in music show, a look-around of Handsome Zhou."

瑜两男一女。女配太子登。
周瑜有两个儿子和一个女儿。女儿许配给太子孙登。
Zhou Yu had two boys and one girl. His daughter was married to Crown Prince Sun Deng.

男循尚公主，拜骑都尉，有瑜风，早卒。
儿子周循娶了公主，被任命为骑都尉，他有周瑜的风范，还很年轻就去世了。
His first son Zhou Xun married Princess Sun Shang, and was appointed captain of the imperial cavalry. He took after his father Zhou Yu, but died a premature death.

循弟胤，初拜兴业都尉，妻以宗女，授兵千人，屯公安。
周循的弟弟周胤，最初被任命为兴业都尉，孙权把同宗人家的女儿嫁给他为妻，授予他士兵千人，驻扎在公安。
At first, Zhou Xun's younger brother, Zhou Yin, was appointed cause-promoting captain, and Sun Quan chose a girl of the same clan as his wife. He was given a thousand soldiers to be stationed at Gong'an.

黄龙元年，封都乡侯，后以罪徙庐陵郡。
黄龙元年，封为都乡侯，后因有罪而被迁徙到庐陵郡。
In the first year of the Yellow-dragon Period, he was conferred on Marquis of Duxiang, but later he was shifted to Luling Prefecture for his crime.

赤乌二年，诸葛瑾、步骘连名上疏曰：“故将军周瑜子胤，昔蒙粉饰，受封为将，不能养之以福，思立功效，至纵情欲，招速罪辟。
赤乌二年，诸葛瑾、步骘联名上疏说：“已故将军周瑜的儿子周胤，过去受到赞美和表扬，受封为将，他不能养身惜福，不思立功报效国家，而是放纵情欲，为自己招致罪罚。
In the second year of the Chiwu Period, Zhuge Jin and Bu Zhi submitted a memorial together that stated: "The late General Zhou Yu's son, Zhou Yin was once over-praised and appointed as a military commander. He could not enjoy happiness, aspire for achievements or make contributions to the country, and instead indulged himself in sensual desires which invited a criminal penalty rapidly upon himself.

臣窃以瑜昔见宠任，入作心膂，出为爪牙，衔命出征，身当矢石，尽节用命，视死如归，故能摧曹操于乌林，走曹仁于郢都，扬国威德，华夏是震，蠢尔蛮荆，莫不宾服，虽周之方叔，汉之信、布，诚无以尚也。
我们私下考虑到周瑜过去曾被主上您宠爱信任，在朝廷内是您的心腹重臣，出京时又是卫国大将，受命出征，身当弓箭礌石，尽忠献身，视死如归，所以在乌林打得曹操失魂落魄，在郢都迫使曹仁落荒而逃，他让国家的声威与德行得到显扬，整个华夏为之震动，愚昧的荆蛮莫不称臣归服，即使是周朝的方叔，前汉的韩信和英布，也实在无法超过他。
We, your subjects, privately consider that Zhou Yu won your favor and trust in the past, and was one of the most important intimate senior officials. After he received orders for his expedition, he braved in person arrows and stones. Being loyal and dedicated, he faced death without fear. It stands to reason that he could have crushed Cao Cao at Wulin, drove away Cao Ren in Yingdu, and gave our country the reputation of having great power and virtue. The whole Huaxia States were shocked in awe, and none of the barbaric minority tribes refused to submit themselves. Even the Fangshu of the Zhou Dynasty, or Han Xin and Ying Bu of the Han Dynasty could not surpass him.

夫折冲捍难之臣，自古帝王莫不贵重，故汉高帝封爵之誓曰‘使黄河如带，太山如砺，国以永存，爰及苗裔’；
大凡制敌取胜抵御外侮的大臣，自古以来的帝王没有不加以特别器重的，所以汉高祖在封爵誓词中说‘纵使黄河细如衣带，泰山已变成砺石，他们的封国也将永存，并将福荫代代相传给他们的子孙’；
Since ancient times, all emperors and kings have treasured all senior officials who courageously defeated enemies and resisted tenaciously against foreign invasions. In his oath conferring noble ranks, the late High Emperor of the Han Dynasty said, 'Even if the Yellow River became so thin as a clothes-belt, and the Tai Mountain turned into a rock, the enfeoffed states would last forever, and the blessings would be passed down to their offspring.'

申以丹书，重以盟诅，藏于宗庙，传于无穷，欲使功臣之后，世世相踵，非徒子孙，乃关苗裔，报德明功，勤勤恳恳，如此之至，欲以劝戒后人，用命之臣，死而无悔也。
他用丹砂书写以申明誓词，加以盟誓来体现举措的隆重，然后将誓词藏在宗庙之中，让它永世相传，意在使功臣的后代，世世相承，不仅仅是数代子孙，而是要传到更久远的后裔，报答臣下恩德和表彰他们的功勋，勤勤恳恳，如此这般的到了极点，无非是要勉励告诫后人，使效命的臣子，虽死无悔。
He wrote in cinnabar red to declare the oaths, held the ceremony of formulating alliances to express the solemnity of the oath, and afterwards he hoarded them in the ancestral temple so that they could be passed down forever. He desired the offspring of the officials of merits to inherit the oaths generation after generation. He didn't wish the oaths to be extincted within only several generations, but instead he had hopes of the oaths continuing on to offspring forever, requiting their virtues and eulogizing their deeds. Why did he express them with such earnest and sincerity? It was nothing but to encourage and admonish the later generations, showing that those devoted officials would have no regrets upon meeting their deaths.

况于瑜身没未久，而其子胤降为匹夫，益可悼伤。
何况在周瑜而言还去世没有多久，而他的儿子周胤却已经被贬降为平民百姓，这就更加令人哀伤不过。
Moreover, Zhou Yu has not been dead for long, and his son Zhou Yin has already been degraded to a common man. This is even more sorrowful.

窃惟陛下钦明稽古，隆于兴继，为胤归诉，乞丐余罪，还兵复爵，使失旦之鸡，复得一鸣，抱罪之臣，展其后效。”
我们私下认为陛下敬肃明察考察古事，特别留意于兴亡继绝，所以替周胤申诉，恳请宽免他未尽的罪罚，赐还他的兵权及恢复他的爵位，使曾经报晓失误的公鸡，再能获得一次打鸣的机会，让有罪在身的臣子，可以尽心改过而显示出日后的成效。”
We hope that your majesty has a clear examination of the history, and pay special attention to the rise, fall, and succession. We plead with you for Zhou Yin. Please forgive him for the rest of his crimes, and give back his soldiers so that he may resume his rank of nobility. Please let the cock which has missed reporting the time in the morning obtain another chance to crow once again, and let the official who has committed crimes have a chance to correct his own mistakes and to demonstrate the positive effect in the future."

权答曰：“腹心旧勋，与孤协事，公瑾有之，诚所不忘。昔胤年少，初无功劳，横受精兵，爵以侯将，盖念公瑾以及于胤也。而胤
孙权答复说：“作为心腹老臣，与我同心协力共事的，周瑜是其中之一，我内心确实不能忘怀。过去周胤年少，还没有什么功劳，平白地授予他精兵，给予他封侯拜将的待遇，就是因为追念周瑜的功绩而延伸到周胤的。而周胤却
Sun Quan replied, "As an old and intimate official with meritorious services assisting me in my cause, Gongjin is certainly one that I truly cannot forget. When Zhou Yin was young, he at first had no accomplishments at all, but he was given excellent soldiers for no reason, and bestowed

恃此，酗淫自恣，前后告喻，曾无悛改。
依仗着这些，沉溺于酒色而自我放纵，我前后多次告诫劝谕，他却丝毫不知悔改。
However, Zhou Yin relied on my favors, indulged himself in the sensual pleasures, and ignored my repeated persuasions and warnings. He had no repentance and made no correction.

孤于公瑾，义犹二君，乐胤成就，岂有已哉？
我和周瑜，道义上就如同跟你们二位一样，只希望周胤能有所成就，这样的心情又怎么可能会有止境呢？
Zhou Gongjin and I, in righteousness, wish, just as you two, that Zhou Yin can have some achievements. How could such a wish ever cease to exist in my mind?

迫胤罪恶，未宜便还，且欲苦之，使自知耳。
迫于周胤所犯罪行的严重性，未便即行召还，想让他经受一些艰苦磨砺，使他自己知罪改正罢了。
Owing to the seriousness of Zhou Yin's crimes, it is inappropriate to summon him back immediately. Moreover, I only expect him to experience some hardships in order to make him realize the severity of his crimes.

今二君勤勤援引汉高河山之誓，孤用恧然。
如今你们二位诚恳地援引汉高祖封爵时的誓词，我为此感到惭愧。
Today you two sincerely cited the oaths of the High Emperor of the Han Dynasty, and I really felt shameful.

虽德非其畴，犹欲庶几，事亦如尔，故未顺旨。
尽管我的德行不能与汉高祖同日而语，仍然有着向他靠近的心思，事情也就是这样了，所以没有顺从你们的建议。
Although I cannot be compared with him in virtue, I still have aspirations to approach him. Things have already entered such a state; therefore, I cannot follow your suggestion.

以公瑾之子，而二君在中间，苟使能改，亦何患乎！”
作为周瑜的儿子，又有你们二位在中间说情，假定他能够自知改正，又还有什么可担心的呢！”
As he is Zhou Yu's son, and you two plead for him, perhaps he can correct himself. What else would I worry about?"

瑾、骘表比上，朱然及全琮亦俱陈乞，权乃许之。会胤病死。
诸葛瑾、步骘的奏章呈上未久，朱然和全琮也跟着上表为周胤说情，孙权这才同意了。恰在这时周胤病死。
Not long after the memorial presented by Zhuge Jin and Bu Zhi, Zhu Ran and Quan Cong also sent a memorial to speak for Zhou Yin. Sun Quan then gave his consent. Just at this time, Zhou Yin died from a disease.

瑜兄子峻，亦以瑜元功为偏将军，领吏士千人。
周瑜的侄子周峻，也因为周瑜的重大功勋而被任命为偏将军，领官兵一千人。
Zhou Jun, a son of Zhou Yu's elder brother, was also appointed wing general because of Zhou Yu's great contributions, and he commanded a thousand officials and soldiers.

峻卒，全琮表峻子护为将。
周峻去世，全琮上奏奏请任命周峻的儿子周护为将领。
After the death of Zhou Jun, Quan Cong wrote a memorial to suggest Zhou Hu, son of Zhou Jun, as the military commander.

权曰：“昔走曹操，拓有荆州，皆是公瑾，常不忘之。
孙权说：“过去击退曹操，夺取开辟荆州，都是周瑜的功劳，我常记在心不曾忘记。
Sun Quan sighed, "I have been keeping in my mind the fact that it was Zhou Gongjin who drove Cao Cao away and extended the territory of Jing Province in the past.

初闻峻亡，仍欲用护，闻护性行危险，用之适为作祸，故便止之。
最初听到周峻去世，我仍有打算任用周护，但我听说周护本性与行为险恶，任用他无异于是给他制造灾祸，所以我也就打消了用他的念头。
When I first heard of the death of Zhou Jun, I still planned to employ Zhou Hu. But when I heard Zhou Hu was hazardous and capricious in conduct and in nature, I gave up on the idea. Undoubtedly, his employment will provide him with the opportunities to make troubles.

孤念公瑾，岂有已乎？”
我怀念周瑜，难道会有止境的吗？”
Will there be an end to my missing of Gongjin?"

