陆逊字伯言，吴郡吴人也。
陆逊字伯言，吴郡吴县人。
Lu Xun, also known as Boyan, was a native of Wu County of Wu Prefecture. 

本名议，世江东大族。
他本名陆议，世代都是江东的大族。
His original name was Lu Yi, and he was a descendant of a big clan that resided for generations in the east area of the Changjiang River.

逊少孤，随从祖庐江太守康在官。
陆逊从小失去父亲，跟随堂祖父庐江太守陆康到他的任所生活。
Lu Xun was an orphan in his childhood, and lived with his grandfather’s elder brother Lu Kang, prefect of Lujiang, in his working place.

袁术与康有隙，将攻康，康遣逊及亲戚还吴。
袁术与陆康有仇，准备进攻陆康，陆康便让陆逊及亲属们返回吴县。
Yuan Shu hated Lu Kang, and prepared to attack him. Because of this, Lu Kang sent Lu Xun and his relatives back to Wu County.

逊年长于康子绩数岁，为之纲纪门户。
陆逊年龄比陆康的儿子陆绩大几岁，就替陆康管理家族事务。
Lu Xun was several years older than Lu Ji, son of Lu Kang, so he managed the affairs in the clan for Lu Kang.

孙权为将军，逊年二十一，始仕幕府，历东西曹令史，出为海昌屯田都尉，并领县事。
孙权做了将军，陆逊二十一岁那年，开始进入孙权幕府任职，历任东西曹令史，出任过海昌县屯田都尉，同时兼管县里的政务。
When Sun Quan was appointed general, Lu Xun was 21, and started his position in the headquarters. He was once the secretary to the deputy directors in the east and west departments, and then he was appointed out of the capital as a magistrate and Haichang captain of the garrison troops for agricultural production.

县连年亢旱，逊开仓谷以振贫民，劝督农桑，百姓蒙赖。
该县已连年大旱，陆逊就打开官仓放粮赈济贫民，劝勉督促农业生产，百姓们因此受益。
When the county encountered successive droughts, Lu Xun opened the official granaries to offer relief to starving people, persuaded and supervised agricultural and silk production, and the common people benefited from these measures.

时吴、会稽、丹杨多有伏匿，逊陈便宜，乞与募焉。
当时吴郡、会稽、丹杨等郡有不少人进山隐藏以逃避赋役，陆逊向孙权陈述有利国家而又切实可行的建议，请求招募这些人。
At that time, many people in Wu Prefecture, Kuaiji and Danyang went into hiding in the mountains to avoid taxes. Lu Xun pleaded to recruit them back into the counties, suggesting to Sun Quan that this would be beneficial to the country and practical to implement.

会稽山贼大帅潘临，旧为所在毒害，历年不禽。
会稽郡山贼大头目潘临，长时间以来都是本地的一大祸害，而官府一直未能将他捉拿归案。
Pan Lin, chieftain of the mountain bandits in Kuaiji, had for long time been a big trouble in the area, and the local government was not able to catch him for many years.

逊以手下召兵，讨治深险，所向皆服，部曲已有二千余人。
陆逊率手下新招募的士兵，深入偏远险地实施讨伐，所到之处山贼无不降服，他的部队因而发展到二千多人。
Lu Xun led his new recruits into the remote and risky places. Wherever he arrived, all mountain bandits surrendered, and his troops developed to over two thousand soldiers.

鄱阳贼帅尤突作乱，复往讨之，拜定威校尉，军屯利浦。
鄱阳郡的贼寇头目尤突作乱，陆逊又前往征讨，官拜定威校尉，屯驻在利浦。
The bandit chief You Tu of Poyang revolted against the government, and Lu Xun went again to defeat him. Afterwards he was appointed Power-establishing Colonel, stationing his troops at Lipu.

权以兄策女配逊，数访世务，逊建议曰：“方今英雄棋跱，豺狼窥望，克敌宁乱，非众不济。
孙权将哥哥孙策的女儿许配给陆逊，多次征询他对时局的看法，陆逊建议说：“当今英雄豪杰星罗棋布而各各对峙，彼此如狼似虎地等待机会吞并对手，要在这种情形下战胜敌人平定祸乱，没有强大的军队必定难以成功。
Sun Quan married his elder brother Sun Ce’s daughter to Lu Xun, and many times he consulted with him about the current affairs. Lu Xun suggested, “Nowadays gallants and heroes are widely spread like pieces on a chessboard. The confrontation between them is like a wolf or a tiger waiting for a chance to swallow its opponent. To defeat the enemies and suppress the rebellions in such situations, we cannot succeed without a powerful army.

而山寇旧恶，依阻深地。夫腹心未平，难以图远，可大部伍，取其精锐。”
而山寇跟我们之间过去就有仇恨，至今仍盘踞于深山险阻之中。大凡内乱尚未平定，就很难设想往境外发展，可以加大军队规模的建设，从中选取培养精锐将士。”
The mountain bandits are our old enemies, and they rely on the risky and remote mountains. If the revolts and turbulences within the territory are not settled in peace, it will be difficult for us to develop externally. We should expand the armies, and then select and organize crack troops.”

权纳其策，以为帐下右部督。
孙权采纳了他的建议，任命他为帐下右部督。
Sun Quan accepted his plan and appointed him commander of the right division in his headquarters.

会丹杨贼帅费栈受曹公印绶，扇动山越，为作内应，权遣逊讨栈。
恰在此时丹阳郡的匪首费栈接受了曹操的拜官印绶，煽动山越居民，作为曹操的内应，孙权派陆逊前去讨伐。
At this time Fei Zhan, chieftain of Danyang rebels, accepted the seal and the honor belt bestowed on him by Lord Cao, and instigated the Yue tribes in the mountains to act as the internal coordinator of Lord Cao. Sun Quan dispatched Lu Xun to suppress Fei Zhan,

栈支党多而往兵少，逊乃益施牙幢，分布鼓角，夜潜山谷间，鼓噪而前，应时破散。
费栈的党羽众多而陆逊带去的官兵较少，陆逊采取多设将旗及分散布置战鼓号角的策略，趁夜潜入山谷之中，然后擂鼓呐喊一起突进，费栈的贼兵顿时被攻破而四散奔逃。
who possessed more branch troops than the number of soldiers that Lu Xun led. Because of this, Lu Xun had his soldiers set up more banners and pennants, and then widely distribute more drums and horns. Stealthily during the night they went into the mountains and valleys, beating drums and blowing horns to attack the rebels. Soon the bandits were defeated and scattered.

遂部伍东三郡，强者为兵，羸者补户，得精卒数万人，宿恶荡除，所过肃清，还屯芜湖。
于是陆逊将东三郡的部队加以整编，强壮的继续当兵，羸弱的补入民户，得到了好几万精兵，长期的仇恨隐患一举荡涤，军队所过之处完全削平，然后回师驻扎芜湖。
Lu Xun reorganized the troops in the three eastern prefectures, and the strong men were recruited as soldiers, while the weak ones were registered as ordinary members of households. He also obtained several ten thousand soldiers as crack troops. The long hatred and hidden troubles were all cleared up. Wherever the army passed, all rebels were eliminated. Lu Xun then returned to be stationed in Wuhu.

会稽太守淳于式表逊枉取民人，愁扰所在。
会稽太守淳于式表奏陆逊违法征用人力，所在郡县苦于他的苛扰。
Chunyu Shi, prefect of Kuaiji, sent a memorial to charge Lu Xun with illegal expropriation of labor forces, and he complained that people in his place suffered from it.

逊后诣都，言次，称式佳吏，权曰：“式白君而君荐之，何也？”
陆逊后来到国都晋见孙权，言谈之间，称赞淳于式是个好官，孙权问他：“淳于式告你的状而你却举荐他，为什么啊？”
Later Lu Xun arrived in the capital to pay a visit to Sun Quan. While talking, Lu Xun praised Chunyu Shi as a good official. Sun Quan told him, “Chunyu Shi complained about you. Why do you recommend him?”

逊对曰：“式意欲养民，是以白逊。
陆逊回答说：“淳于式意在保养民力，因此才举我陆逊。
Lu Xun replied, “Chunyu Shi wanted to preserve people’s strength after the upheaval, so he complained about me.

若逊复毁式以乱圣听，不可长也。”
如果我再诋毁他从而扰乱主上的视听，这种风气不可助长。”
 If I again slandered him to mislead your majesty, such behavior should not be encouraged.”

权曰：“此诚长者之事，顾人不能为耳。”
孙权说：“这确实是德高望重者的行事方式，但是一般人做不到罢了。”
Sun Quan praised him, “This is indeed a manner of a venerable senior, something an ordinary man cannot accomplish.”

吕蒙称疾诣建业，逊往见之，谓曰：“关羽接境，如何远下，后不当可忧也？”
吕蒙声称有病要去建业，陆逊去见他，对他说：“关羽跟我国接壤驻兵，怎么您还远离防区东下，您的后方难道不该有所顾虑么？”
Lü Meng claimed he had contracted a disease and departed for Jianye to receive treatment. Lu Xun paid him a visit and asked, “Guan Yu stationed his troops adjacent to our border, how can you be so far away? Don’t you have any worries about your rear?”

蒙曰：“诚如来言，然我病笃。”
吕蒙回答说：“诚然如你所言，但我的病情确实很重。”
Lü Meng said, “Indeed, I have these worries just as you have said; however, I am seriously ill.”

逊曰：“羽矜其骁气，陵轹于人。始有大功，意骄志逸，但务北进，未嫌于我，有相闻病，必益无备。今出其不意，自可禽制。下见至尊，宜好为计。”
陆逊说：“关羽仗着自己的勇猛气势，凌驾于他人之上。刚刚建立大功，意态骄纵放肆，只顾向北进攻，对我国不存戒心，如果他听说您病了，必定更加无所防备。眼下对他发动出其不意的进攻，自然可以将他擒拿制服。您到下游面见主上，应好好谋划此事。”
Lu Xun remarked, “Guan Yu relies on his valiance, and rides roughshod on others. Having just achieved a great victory, he is arrogant and overbearing. Now he is planning on attacking the north, and does not fear us. If he learns that you are ill, he will further relax in his precautions. Now, if we attack him unexpectedly, we could catch him. When you see his majesty in Jianye, it would be proper to have a good plan.”

蒙曰：“羽素勇猛，既难为敌，且已据荆州，恩信大行，兼始有功，胆势益盛，未易图也。”
吕蒙说：“关羽一向勇猛，本来就很难跟他对敌，况且他已经占据荆州，对百姓广施恩信，再加之他刚刚建有大功，胆气和威势越发旺盛，不容易谋取他。”
Lü Meng said, “Guan Yu is always valiant and ferocious, and it is difficult to defeat him. Furthermore, he has already been garrisoned in Jing Province for quite a long time. He extends widely his favors and faithfulness to the people there. In addition to his recent victory, he has also become even more powerful and influential, so much so that it is not easy to defeat him.”

蒙至都，权问：“谁可代卿者？”
吕蒙到了国都，孙权问他：“那边谁可以代替您呢？”
When Lü Meng arrived in the capital, Sun Quan asked him, “Who can replace you?”

蒙对曰：“陆逊意思深长，才堪负重，观其规虑，终可大任。而未有远名，非羽所忌，无复是过。若用之，当令外自韬隐，内察形便，然后可克。”
吕蒙回答说：“陆逊思虑深远，有担当重任的才能，我观察他的谋划，最终可以承担起制服关羽的重要职责。同时他在敌国的名头还不大，不是关羽所顾忌的人物，没有人再比他更合适的了。倘若任用他，应让他对外不露锋芒，暗中观察有利形势，然后就可以打败关羽了。”
Lü Meng answered, “Lu Xun is circumspect and far-sighted. He has the capacity to shoulder such an important task. In my observation of his plan and consideration, he can in the end bear the important responsibility of defeating Guan Yu. Moreover, he is not known in the enemy country, and he is not a figure Guan Yu cares about. No other man is more suitable. If he is appointed, you should tell him to disguise himself in order to observe without detection and seize any possible opportunity. He can then defeat Guan Yu.”

权乃召逊，拜偏将军、右部督，代蒙。
孙权便召见陆逊，任命他为偏将军、右部督，代替吕蒙。
Sun Quan then summoned Lu Xun, and appointed him wing general and commander of the right division to replace Lü Meng.

逊至陆口，书与羽曰：“前承观衅而动，以律行师，小举大克，一何巍巍！
陆逊来到陆口，写信给关羽说：“以前承您窥伺敌人的间隙果断行动，遵循兵法规则出兵，轻而易举便取得重大胜利，这是何等的崇高伟大啊！
Lu Xun reached Lukou and wrote a letter to Guan Yu: “Some time ago, because of your careful observation, you seized the opportunity to engage yourself in a timely military operation, which followed the military principles and brought an easy victory. How great and lofty you are!

敌国败绩，利在同盟，闻庆拊节，想遂席卷，共奖王纲。
敌国大败亏输，利益归于同盟，听到您的胜利喜讯不觉击节叫好，想您乘胜前进席卷中原，共同维护汉朝天子的纲纪。
The failure of the enemy country brings a benefit to our alliance, and upon hearing of the good news of your victory, I cannot help but to clap my hands in admiration, and imagine your follow-up victories sweeping over the Central Plains. Together we defend the social order and laws of the Han Dynasty.

近以不敏，受任来西，延慕光尘，思禀良规。”
最近我凭着微不足道的才能，受命西来与您为邻，一直仰慕您的风采，想望领受您有益的意见。”
Recently, with my insignificant talent, I received the appointment to come to the west as your neighbor. I have been admiring your graceful bearing, and wish to hear your beneficial advice.”

又曰：“于禁等见获，遐迩欣叹，以为将军之勋足以长世，虽昔晋文城濮之师，淮阴拔赵之略，蔑以尚兹。
又说：“于禁等人被您俘获，远近对您都钦佩赞叹，认为将军您的功勋足以永垂来世，即使是昔日晋文公城濮之战的得胜之师，以及淮阴侯韩信攻取赵国的谋略，也丝毫不能超过将军您的功绩。
He again wrote: “Yu Jin et al. have been captured. People far and near praised and admired you. In my opinion, your glorious feats will be famed forever. The triumphant army of Duke Wen of Jin at the battle of Chengpu or the stratagems that Han Xin, Marquis of Huaiyin, designed to destroy Zhao State — neither of them could surpass your great success.

闻徐晃等少骑驻旌，窥望麾葆。
听说徐晃等人以小规模的骑兵驻札，暗中观察您的动向。
I heard that Xu Huang et al. led a small troop of cavalry to be stationed close to you to spy on your movement.

操猾虏也，忿不思难。恐潜增众，以逞其心。
曹操是个狡猾的敌人，失败所带来的愤怒使得他完全不计后果，只怕他会暗自增派大军，从而达到自己的目的。
Cao Cao is a cunning man, and his anger of this failure will instigate him to take adventurous maneuvers. I am afraid that he will increase his army stealthily to realize his purpose. 

虽云师老，犹有骁悍。
虽说敌军出征日久已疲惫不堪，其中毕竟还会有勇猛强悍的人物。
Although the enemy army has been long exhausted due to expeditions, there are still some gallant and ferocious soldiers.

且战捷之后，常苦轻敌，古人杖术，军胜弥警。愿将军广为方计，以全独克。
况且军队战胜之后，往往会有轻敌的困扰。古人凭借兵法作战，克敌制胜之后反而更加警惕。希望将军您多多注意计策的运用，来保全您独一无二的大捷。
 Moreover, after a victory, the army usually would suffer from underestimating the enemy. The ancient people relied on warcraft in fighting, and they kept even stricter vigilance after victories. I wish you, general, to pay more attention to the exploitation of different tactical means to safeguard your unique victory.

仆书生疏迟，忝所不堪，喜邻威德，乐自倾尽，虽未合策，犹可怀也。
我身为书生而懒散迟钝，有愧于这个职位深恐难以胜任，为此我十分高兴并且钦佩有您这位声威与德行同样显赫的邻居，也特别乐意向您倾诉自己的肺腑之言，尽管我所说的一切未必吻合您的深谋远虑，但我的心情您是可以理解的。
I, as a scholar, am slothful and slow-witted. I fear that I am not capable of this responsibility. It is a pleasure for me to have you, an admirable, powerful and virtuous neighbor, and I am also willing to tell you honestly what I have thought. Although what I have said may not be in accordance with your opinions, I think you understand me. 

倘明注仰，有以察之。”
假如您明白了我的仰慕，请您对我的意见有所体察。”
If this is true, please think over my suggestions.”

羽览逊书有谦下自托之意，意大安，无复所嫌。
关羽看过陆逊的来信便认为这是种谦虚并希望仰赖自己的姿态，为此他大为宽心，不再对东吴军队有所戒备。
After Guan Yu read Lu Xun’s letter and thought over Lu Xun expressed modesty and intention to rely on him, he felt relaxed and at ease. He decided to no longer maintain his vigilance.

逊具启形状，陈其可禽之要。
陆逊把这些情况详细禀告孙权，陈述分析可以擒获关羽的要点所在。
Lu Xun, in his report, narrated in detail what had happened, describing and analyzing the key points of the possible capture of Guan Yu. 

权乃潜军而上，使逊与吕蒙为前部，至即克公安、南郡。
孙权于是悄悄派兵逆流而上，让陆逊与吕蒙担当前锋，一到便迅速攻占了公安、南郡。
Sun Quan dispatched a secret group of soldiers upstream along the Changjiang River, and appointed Lu Xun and Lü Meng as vanguards. Upon the arrival, they swiftly attacked and occupied Gong’an and Nan Prefecture.

逊径进，领宜都太守，拜抚边将军，封华亭侯。
陆逊长驱推进，兼任宜都太守，拜授抚边将军，爵封华亭侯。
Lu Xun continued to drive forward. He was appointed prefect of Yidu, Border-pacifying General, and conferred on Marquis of Huating.

备宜都太守樊友委郡走，诸城长吏及蛮夷君长皆降。
刘备任命的宜都太守樊友弃郡逃走，下属各城的长官及蛮夷头目纷纷投降东吴。
Liu Bei’s Yidu prefect Fan You gave up on the prefecture and fled, while the magistrates of the cities and towns, and chieftains of the minority tribes all surrendered. 

逊请金银铜印，以假授初附。是岁建安二十四年十一月也。
陆逊请求发给金、银、铜等三种官印，以便给予那些刚刚投降归附的人授予非正式的任命。这一年是建安二十四年十一月。
Lu Xun requested to provide gold, silver and bronze official seals to give temporary appointments for those who had recently joined them. These events all occurred during the eleventh lunar month of the twenty-fourth year in the Jian’an Period.

逊遣将军李异、谢旌等将三千人，攻蜀将詹晏、陈凤。
陆逊派将军李异、谢旌等人率三千兵士，进攻蜀将詹晏和陈凤。
Lu Xun dispatched generals Li Yi, Xie Jing and several others to lead three thousand soldiers to attack generals Zhan Yan and Chen Feng of Shu State.

异将水军，旌将步兵，断绝险要，即破晏等，生降得凤。
李异统领水军，谢旌统领步兵，阻断险地关隘，当即打败詹晏等人，迫使陈凤投降。
Li Yi commanded the navy and Xie Jing commanded the infantry. They blocked the risky routes and critical passes, immediately defeated Zhan Yan and his men, and forced Chen Feng to surrender.

又攻房陵太守邓辅、南乡太守郭睦，大破之。
又进攻房陵太守邓辅和南乡太守郭睦，大获胜利。
They again attacked Deng Fu, prefect of Fangling, and Guo Mu, prefect of Nanxiang, crushing them in great victories.

秭归大姓文布、邓凯等合夷兵数千人，首尾西方。
秭归的豪门大族文布、邓凯等纠合夷兵几千人，在西边呼应蜀军。
Wen Bu and Deng Kai were from the powerful and honorable clans of Zigui County where they gathered several thousand soldiers of the minority tribes, and responded in the west to the army of Shu State.

逊复部旌讨破布、凯。布、凯脱走，蜀以为将。
陆逊又指挥谢旌击败文布、邓凯。文布、邓凯脱身逃走，蜀国任命他们为将军。
Lu Xun again commanded Xie Jing to defeat Wen Bu and Deng Kai. Wen Bu and Deng Kai escaped, and Shu State appointed them generals.

逊令人诱之，布帅众还降。前后斩获招纳，凡数万计。
陆逊派人引诱他们，文布率军又回来投降。陆逊前后斩杀、俘虏、招降及收罗的，总共有几万人。
Lu Xun sent some men to lure them back, and Wen Bu again led his troops back to surrender. Altogether there were several ten thousand soldiers that Lu Xun killed, captured, or summoned to surrender for recruitment.

权以逊为右护军、镇西将军，进封娄侯。
孙权任命陆逊为右护军、镇西将军，进封娄侯。
Sun Quan appointed Lu Xun right defence army commander and West-suppressing General, also conferring on him the title of Marquis of Lou.

时荆州士人新还，仕进或未得所，逊上疏曰：“昔汉高受命，招延英异，光武中兴，群俊毕至，苟可以熙隆道教者，未必远近。
当时荆州流亡在外的儒生、士大夫们新近返回，有的人还没有得到合适的安置，陆逊上疏说：“从前汉高祖登极称帝，招揽延用德才非凡的人，光武帝中兴，众多杰出的人才都来到他的麾下，意味着只要是可以使国家政教昌明的，不必在乎人才的远近亲疏。
At this time, the exiled scholar-officials of Jing Province had just returned, and some were not able to find a suitable job. Lu Xun wrote a memorial and suggested: “Of old, after the Founding Emperor of the Han Dynasty ascended the throne, he recruited and searched for the talents of extraordinary persons. He also worked on the restoration of Emperor Guangwu, which attracted a large gathering of all talents and superior men. This means that we should not emphasize the close or distant relation with talents as long as they can make contributions to the prosperity of state politics and education.

今荆州始定，人物未达，臣愚楼楼，乞普加覆载抽拔之恩，令并获自进，然后四海延颈，思归大化。”
如今荆州刚刚平定，那些有名望才能的人还没有显达，在此我以恭谨的心意，恳请您普遍给予培养提拔的恩德，使他们都能获得进用，会引颈倾慕，都想着前来接受您广远深入的教化了。”
Now Jing Province has just settled down in peace, and those talents and well-known persons have not been promoted or become influential. Thus I plead with you, in great respect, that you would give favors widely to promote and cultivate them, so that they can all have opportunities to be employed and promoted. Afterwards people throughout the land will crane their necks to express their admiration, desiring to come to your state to receive such profound cultivation.” 

权敬纳其言。
孙权恭敬地采纳了他的意见。
Sun Quan respectfully accepted these suggestions.

黄武元年，刘备率大众来向西界，权命逊为大都督、假节，督朱然、潘璋、宋谦、韩当、徐盛、鲜于丹、孙桓等五万人拒之。
黄武元年，刘备亲率大军来到吴国西部边境，孙权任命陆逊为大都督、假以符节，统帅朱然、潘璋、宋谦、韩当、徐盛、鲜于丹、孙桓等部共五万人马迎击。
In the first year of the Huangwu Period, Liu Bei led his mighty armies to the western borders. Sun Quan appointed Lu Xun as general commander with the provisional imperial tallies to conduct Zhu Ran, Pan Zhang, Song Qian, Han Dang, Xu Sheng, Xianyu Dan, and Sun Huan with fifty thousand soldiers to resist the invasion.

备从巫峡、建平连围至夷陵界，立数十屯，以金锦爵赏诱动诸夷，使将军冯习为大督，张南为前部，辅匡、赵融、廖淳、傅肜等各为别督，先遣吴班将数千人于平地立营，欲以挑战。
刘备的军营从巫峡、建平直到夷陵边界都以木石筑成防御工事彼此相连，一共设置了几十个营寨，用金银、锦缎、爵位封赏来引诱众蛮夷接受调度，让将军冯习担任大都督，张南为前锋，辅匡、赵融、廖淳、傅肜等人分任各部都督，先派吴班带领数千人在平地扎营，想以此挑动吴军出战。
Liu Bei constructed several fortified campsites that were connected from the Wu Gorge in Jianping to the borders of Yiling. He also lured the minority tribes with gold, brocade, rewards and noble ranks to accept his control. Liu Bei appointed General Feng Xi as general commander, Zhang Nan as commander of the vanguard, and Fu Kuang, Zhao Rong, Liao Chun, and Fu Tong as commanders of each different troop. Liu Bei first dispatched Wu Ban with several thousand soldiers to set up the camps on the level ground, and intended to send a challenge.

诸将皆欲击之，逊曰：“此必有谲，且观之。”
诸将都想出营作战，陆逊说：“对方必定有诈，姑且先观察一阵再说。”
The commanders all wanted to strike the enemy, but Lu Xun judged, “It must be a trick. Wait and see.”

备知其计不可，乃引伏兵八千，从谷中出。
刘备明白此计难以奏效，就带着八千名伏兵，从山谷中撤出。
Liu Bei knew the trick would not work, so he led the eight thousand soldiers to an ambush outside the valley.

逊曰：“所以不听诸君击班者，揣之必有巧故也。”
陆逊说：“我之所以不许各位进攻吴班，是因为揣测蜀军定有诡诈的缘故。”
Lu Xun said, “The reason I did not agree with you to strike Wu Ban is because I guessed there must have been some sort of trick.”

逊上疏曰：“夷陵要害，国之关限，虽为易得，亦复易失。失之非徒损一郡之地，荆州可忧。
陆逊给孙权上疏说：“夷陵是军事要地，堪称国家的关隘险阻，尽管容易攻占，同样也容易丢失。夷陵失守并非只是损失一个郡的土地，接下来荆州的安危就都令人担忧了。
Lu Xun wrote a memorial and said, “The critical pass of Yiling is the country’s border pass. Although it is easy to take over, it is also easy to lose. Its loss would not only be the loss of the land in a prefecture, but also would jeopardize the whole Jing Province.

今日争之，当令必谐。
如今去争夺此地，我保证务必能马到成功。
Today we compete for it, and I am sure, we can take it over. 

备干天常，不守窟穴而敢自送，臣虽不材，凭奉威灵，以顺讨逆，破坏在近。
刘备违背常理，不固守巢穴反而自己前来送死，我虽然没有什么才能，但仰仗主上显赫的声威，以顺讨逆，彻底打垮刘备的捷报已近在眼前。
Liu Bei has violated against the normal movement of heaven, and does not defend his own country, thus daring the invitation of death. Although I am not talented, I am relying on your power and reputation to suppress the rebellion in the name of righteousness. Now the time to defeat him approaches.

寻备前后行军，多败少成，推此论之，不足为戚。
我综合考察刘备前后用兵的经历，可以说是败多胜少，由此推论，对他这次的军事行动也不必犯愁。
I have examined Liu Bei’s experiences when conducting battles, and we can say that he has lost more battles than he has won. From this we can deduce that we should not worry about his operation this time.

臣初嫌之水陆俱进，今反舍船就步，处处结营，察其布置，必无他变。伏愿至尊高枕，不以为念也。”
我最初还顾忌他水陆并进，现在他却弃船上岸改为全面的步兵作战方式，各处安营扎寨，从他的军事部署可知，到后来也不会有什么大的变动。我深心希望主上高枕无忧，不必因此挂念。”
 At first, I had scruples about his simultaneous waterway and land movement, but today he gave up the boats and walked on foot, constructing campsites all along the way. My judgment through these observations is that his deployment will not change. I wish your majesty to relax. Do not worry about it.”

诸将并曰：“攻备当在初，今乃令人五六百里，相衔持经七八月，其诸要害皆以固守，击之必无利矣。”
诸将一致认为：“进攻刘备应在他大军刚到的时刻，如今已让他深入国境五六百里地，相互对峙也已经七八个月，他的诸多险要之处都已严密布防，这时要对他发起进攻必定讨不到什么好处。”
The generals all complained, “We should attack Liu Bei in the beginning. Now his armies have moved in for five or six hundred *li*, and have confronted with us for seven or eight months. All their critical passes and places have been fortified, and an attack on them will bring nothing beneficial.”

逊曰：“备是猾虏，更尝事多，其军始集，思虑精专，未可干也。今住已久，不得我便，兵疲意沮，计不复生，掎角此寇，正在今日。”
陆逊说：“刘备是个狡诈的对手，加上经历丰富，在其大军集结之初，他的谋划也最是精纯专一，不可以轻易进犯他。如今屯驻已久，没能占到我军的便宜，官兵疲惫而士气渐渐低落，他也再想不出其他妙计，夹击并对他形成围歼局面，就正是眼下这个时候啊。”
Lu Xun explained, “Liu Bei is cunning and rich in experiences. At the beginning of the armies’ assembly, he could concentrate, thinking carefully about the plan, and we could not strike him. Now the armies have stayed here for a long time, and they have not gained an upper hand. They are exhausted and frustrated. I judge that they now cannot have new schemes, and today is the time for us to make a pincer attack.”

乃先攻一营，不利。诸将皆曰：“空杀兵耳。”
于是先出兵进攻蜀军的一处营寨，被对方击退。诸将都说：“这是白白地让士兵送死。”
Therefore, Lu Xun conducted the first attack on a campsite but failed. The generals all grumbled, “The soldiers have just lost their lives in vain.”

逊曰：“吾已晓破之之术。”乃敕各持一把茅，以火攻，拔之。
陆逊说：“我已经想明白打败他的办法了。”接着便命令士兵每人各持一束茅草，展开火攻，真的攻陷了蜀军屯营。
Lu Xun then said with confidence, “I have learned the way to defeat them.” He ordered each soldier to hold a bundle of dried grass, and attack the enemy campsites with fire. With this method, they destroyed some campsites.

一尔势成，通率诸军同时俱攻，斩张南、冯习及胡王沙摩柯等首，破其四十余营。
一等到火攻在蜀军连营内形成燎原之势，陆逊便率领各军同时进攻，斩杀了张南、冯习及胡王沙摩柯等人，攻破蜀军营寨四十多处。
Immediately the fire spread rapidly. Lu Xun commanded the armies to attack all the enemy campsites at the same time. They cut off the heads of generals Zhang Nan and Feng Xi, Shamoke, the chieftain of the Hu tribes, and many others, breaking into over forty enemy campsites.

备将杜路、刘宁等穷逼请降。
刘备的将领杜路、刘宁等人因走投无路而被迫请求投降。
Liu Bei’s generals Du Lu, Liu Ning and many others could not find an escape route and were forced to surrender.

备升马鞍山，陈兵自绕。逊督促诸军四面蹙之，土崩瓦解，死者万数。
刘备登上马鞍山，周围布置军队防守。陆逊督促各军四面逼攻，蜀军土崩瓦解，死者数以万计。
Liu Bei himself ascended the Ma’an Mountain, and deployed his troops around him. Lu Xun ordered his armies to press from all four sides, routing Liu Bei’s armies. Over ten thousand soldiers died in the battle.

备因夜遁，驿人自担，烧铙铠断后，仅得入白帝城。
刘备乘夜逃走，靠着驿站里的人员将败逃士兵丢弃的铙钹、铠甲一担一担地挑来纵火焚烧阻断后面的追兵，刘备才幸而得以逃入白帝城内。
but Liu Bei escaped in the night. His men in the post stations collected big cymbals and armors left on the ground, and then burned them to block the pursuers while Liu Bei fled into Baidi Town.

其舟船器械，水步军资，一时略尽，尸骸漂流，塞江而下。
他的舟船兵器以及水陆两军的军用物资，一时间损失殆尽，蜀军尸体随波逐流，塞满了整个江面。
His boats, ships, weapons, infantry and navy military supplies were all lost in an instant. The dead bodies of Shu soldiers covered the water surface and floated down the river. 

备大惭恚，曰：“吾乃为逊所折辱，岂非天邪！”
刘备十分羞惭和忿恨，说：“我竟然被陆逊所侮辱，这难道不是天意吗！”
Liu Bei felt greatly shamed and resentful, “I have been frustrated and insulted by Lu Xun. Is it the will of heaven?”

初，孙桓别讨备前锋于夷道，为备所围，求救于逊。
当初，孙桓另率一支人马在夷道进攻刘备的前锋部队，被刘备包围，因而向陆逊求援。
Earlier Sun Huan led another troop to attack Liu Bei’s vanguard at Yidao. They were surrounded by Liu Bei so he pleaded with Lu Xun for support. 

逊曰：“未可。”
陆逊说：“还不能去救他。”
Lu Xun said, “We cannot now.”

诸将曰：“孙安东公族，见围已困，奈何不救？”
众将说：“安东将军孙桓是主上的同族，他被围困而且情况紧急，为何不去救他呢？”
The generals protested, “Sun Andong is from the same clan as his majesty, and he has been surrounded in an urgent situation. Why do you not rescue him?”

逊曰：“安东得士众心，城牢粮足，无可忧也。待吾计展，欲不救安东，安东自解。”
陆逊说：“安东将军很得官兵人心，又城池坚固而且粮食充足，没有什么可担忧的。等我的计谋得以施行，就算不去救他，敌军对他的围困也会自然解除。”
Lu Xun said, “Andong was trusted by his officials and soldiers. The town walls are solid and food is ample. There is nothing to worry about. Please wait for the development of my stratagems. I am not going to rescue Andong, but the siege will dissolve itself.”

及方略大施，备果奔溃。
到了陆逊的计谋得以全面实施，刘备果然奔逃崩溃。
With the full implementation of Lu Xun’s stratagems, Liu Bei’s troops were routed. 

桓后见逊曰：“前实怨不见救，定至今日，乃知调度自有方耳。”
孙桓后来见到陆逊说：“以前我确实怨您不来相救，如今大局已定，才知道您的指挥自有方略啊。”
Sun Huan afterwards saw Lu Xun and said, “At first, I really resented that you did not rescue me, but as of now, I have come to understand your wise stratagems and command.”

当御备时，诸将军或是孙策时旧将，或公室贵戚，各自矜恃，不相听从。
当抵御刘备时，众将军有的是孙策执政时的老将，有的是皇亲国戚，各自骄矜自负，互不买账，不听指挥。
In the resistance against Liu Bei, the generals were either the old commanders under Sun Ce, or the noble relatives of the Sun clan. They were arrogant and did not obey orders.

逊案剑曰：“刘备天下知名，曹操所惮，今在境界，此强对也。
陆逊手按剑柄说：“刘备天下闻名，曹操对他都畏惧三分，如今他率军来到边界，这是我们强劲的对手呀。
Lu Xun held his sword and shouted, “Liu Bei is well-known under heaven. Even Cao Cao feared him. Now he, the powerful opponent, is on our border. 

诸君并荷国恩，当相辑睦，共剪此虏，上报所受，而不相顺，非所谓也。
诸位都深受国家恩典，彼此应当和睦相处，同心协力消灭这个强敌，向上报答所受的国恩，而现在却是互不和睦协调，就不是我前面所说的这层意思了。
You all share the royal favors, and should work together to eliminate this enemy with concerted efforts, requiting royal favors with your gratitude. Now you are not coordinating in harmony, contrary to what I have expected.

仆虽书生，受命主上。
我虽是一个书生，接受主上的委任已是事实。
Although I am a scholar, I have received an order from our master. 

国家所以屈诸君使相承望者，以仆有尺寸可称，能忍辱负重故也。
国家之所以委屈诸位来接受我的统一指挥，是因为我多少还有一些长处可以相称，并且能够忍辱负重的缘故。
The reason that the state requests you to accept my command is because I have, more or less, commensurable ability, and can endure humiliation for the sake of an important mission. 

各在其事，岂复得辞！军令有常，不可犯矣。”
每个人都应各自承担自己的职责，怎么能再推三阻四呢！军令有不可变更的法则，是不可以违犯的。”
Everyone should bear his own duty. How can you decline your duty with such excuses! The military orders follow their constant principle. No one can violate them!”

及至破备，计多出逊，诸将乃服。
等到打败了刘备，其间决胜谋划大多出自于陆逊，众将这才对他心服口服。
To the time of the defeat of Liu Bei, most of the decisive stratagems were created by Lu Xun, and the generals were thus fully convinced.

权闻之，曰：“君何以初不启诸将违节度者邪？”
孙权听说了这些情况，说：“您当初为何不上奏众将不服从指挥约束呢？”
When Sun Quan learned of this, he asked, “Why did you not, in the beginning, report that the generals would not obey your order?”

逊对曰：“受恩深重，任过其才。
陆逊回答说：“我承受国家深厚的恩典，所担负的重任超出了我的才能。
Lu Xun replied, “I have received great favors, and my responsibility has exceeded my ability. 

又此诸将或任腹心，或堪爪牙，或是功臣，皆国家所当与共克定大事者。
再说众将有的充当着贤智策谋的角色，有的是得力的战将，有的是国家功臣，都是国家所应依靠以共同奠定大业的人物。
Besides, these generals are either trusted strategists, powerful warriors, or officials of merits. They are all pillars of the country supporting the cause of reunification. 

臣虽驽懦，窃慕相如、寇恂相下之义，以济国事。”
我虽然愚钝懦弱，私下里也很钦慕蔺相如、寇恂那种互相谦让的风范，从而成就国家的政事。”
Though I am stupid and weak, I personally admire the modest manners of Lin Xiangru and Kou Xun for the success of the royal cause.”

权大笑称善，加拜逊辅国将军，领荆州牧，即改封江陵侯。
孙权大笑称好，加授陆逊为辅国将军，兼任荆州牧，当即改封他为江陵侯。
Sun Quan laughed and praised him. On the spot, he promoted Lu Xun to State-assisting General and governor of Jing Province, also conferring on him Marquis of Jiangling.