夏书曰：禹抑洪水十三年，过家不入门。
《夏书》记载：禹治理洪水经历了十三年，其间路过家门口也不回家看望亲人。
The documents on the Xia dynasty tell us that Emperor Yu spent thirteen years controlling and bringing an end to the floods, and during that period, though he passed by the very gate of his own house, he did not take the time to enter.

陆行载车，水行载舟，泥行蹈毳，山行即桥。
行陆路时乘车，水路乘船，泥路乘橇，山路坐轿，走遍了所有地方。
On land he travelled in a cart and on water in a boat: he rode a sledge to cross the mud and wore cleated shoes in climbing the mountains.

以别九州，随山浚川，任土作贡。
从而划分了九州边界，随山势地形，疏浚了淤积的大河川，根据土地物产确定了赋税等级。
In this way he marked out the nine provinces, led the rivers along the bases of the mountains, decided what tribute was appropriate for each region in accordance with the quality of its soil.

通九道，陂九泽，度九山。
使九州道路通畅，筑起了九州的泽岸，度量了九州山势。
opened up the nine roads, built embankments around the nine marshes, and made a survey of the nine mountains.

然河菑衍溢，害中国也尤甚。唯是为务。
然而还有黄河泛滥成灾，给中国造成很大危害。于是集中力量治理黄河。
Of all the rivers, the Yellow River caused the greatest damage to China by overflowing its banks and inundating the land, and therefore he turned all his attention to controlling it.

故道河自积石历龙门，南到华阴，东下砥柱，及孟津、雒汭，至于大邳。
引导河水自积石山经过龙门，南行到华阴县，东下经砥柱山和孟津、雒汭，到达大邳山。
Thus he led the Yellow River in a course from Jishi past Longmen and south to the northern side of Mt.Hua; from there eastward along the foot of Dizhu Mountain, past the Meng Ford and the confluence of the Luo River to Dapei.

於是禹以为河所从来者高，水湍悍，难以行平地，数为败，乃厮二渠以引其河。
禹以为大邳以上黄河流经的地区地势高，水流湍急，难以在大邳以东的平地经过，否则会时常败堤破岸，造成水灾，于是将黄河分流成二条河以减小水势。
At this point Emperor Yu decided that, since the river was descending from high ground and the flow of the water was rapid and fierce, it would be difficult to guide it over level ground without danger of frequent disastrous break-throughs. He therefore divided the flow into two channels.

北载之高地，过降水，至于大陆，播为九河，同为逆河，入于勃海。
并引水北行，从地势较高的冀州地区流过，经降水，到大陆泽，以下开九条大河，共同迎受黄河之水，流入勃海。
leading along the higher ground to the north, past the Jiang River and so to Dalu. There he spread it out to form the Nine Rivers, brought it together again to make the Backward-flowing River (i.e, tidal river), and thence led it into the Gulf of Bohai.

九川既疏，九泽既洒，诸夏艾安，功施于三代。
九州河川都已疏通，九州大泽都筑了障水堤岸，华夏诸国得到治理而安定，其功绩使夏、商、周三代受益不绝。
When he had thus opened up the rivers of the nine provinces and fixed the outlets of the nine marshes, peace and order were brought to the lands of the Xia and his achievements continued to benefit the Three Dynasties which followed.

自是之後，荥阳下引河东南为鸿沟，以通宋、郑、陈、蔡、曹、卫，与济、汝、淮、泗会。
后人又自荥阳以下引河水东南流，成为鸿沟，把宋、郑、陈、蔡、曹、卫各国连结起来，分别与济、汝、淮、泗诸水系交会。
Sometime later the Hong Canal was constructed, leading off from the lower reaches of the Yellow River at Xingyang, passing through the states of Song, Zheng, Chen, Cai, Cao, and Wei, and joining up with the Ji, Ru, Huai, and Si rivers.

于楚，西方则通渠汉水、云梦之野，东方则通沟江淮之间。
在楚地，西方在汉水和云梦泽之间修渠连通，东方则在江淮之间用沟渠相连。
In Chu two canals were built, one in the west from the Han River through the plains of Yunmeng, and one in the east to connect the Yangtze and Huai rivers.

於吴，则通渠三江、五湖。
在吴地于三江、五湖间开凿河渠。
In Wu a canal was dug to connect the three mouths of the Yangtze and the Five Lakes.

於齐，则通菑济之间。
在齐则于菑、济二水间修渠。
In Qi one between the Zi and Ji rivers.

於蜀，蜀守冰凿离碓，辟沫水之害，穿二江成都之中。
在蜀，有蜀守李冰凿开离堆，以避沫水造成的水灾；又在成都一带开凿二条江水支流。
In Shu, Li Bing, the governor of Shu, cut back the Li Escarpment to control the ravages of the Mo River and also opened up channels for the Two Rivers through the region of Chengdu.

此渠皆可行舟，有馀则用溉騑，百姓飨其利。
这些河渠水深都能行舟，有余就用来灌溉农田，百姓获利不小。
All of these canals were navigable by boat, and whenever there was an overflow of water it was used for irrigation purposes, so that the people gained great benefit from them.

至于所过，往往引其水益用溉田畴之渠，以万亿计，然莫足数也。
至于渠水所过地区，人们往往又开凿一些支渠引渠水灌田，数目之多不下千千万万，但工程小，不足数计。
In addition there were literally millions of small canals which led off from the larger ones at numerous points along their course and were employed to irrigate an increasingly large area of land, but none of these are worth mentioning here.

西门豹引漳水溉鄴，以富魏之河内。
西门豹引漳水灌溉邺郡的农田，使魏国的河内地区富裕起来。
Ximen Bao built a canal to lead off the waters of the Zhang River and irrigate Ye, and as a result the region of Henei in the state of Wei became rich.

而韩闻秦之好兴事，欲罢之，毋令东伐，乃使水工郑国间说秦，令凿泾水自中山西邸瓠口为渠，并北山东注洛三百馀里，欲以溉田。
韩国听说秦国好兴办工役等新奇事，想以此消耗它的国力，使它无力对山东诸国用兵，于是命水利工匠郑国找机会游说秦国，要它凿穿泾水，从中山以西到瓠口，修一条水渠，出北山向东流入洛水长三百余里，欲用来灌溉农田。
Another time the state of Hann, learning that the state of Qin was fond of undertaking large projects, dispatched a water engineer named Zheng Guo to go to Qin and persuade the ruler to construct a canal from a point on the Jin River west of Mt Zhong to the pass at Hukou, and from there along the Northern Mountains east into the Luo River, a distance of over 300 li. Ostensibly the purpose of the project was to provide irrigation for the fields.

中作而觉，秦欲杀郑国。郑国曰：“始臣为间，然渠成亦秦之利也。”
渠未成，郑国的目的被发觉，秦国要杀他，郑国说：“臣开始是为韩国做奸细而来，但渠成以后确实对秦国有利。”
though in fact Zheng Guo and the rulers of Hann hoped thereby to wear out the energies of the state of Qin so that it would not march east to attack Hann. Zheng Guo succeeded in getting the project started, but halfway through the real nature of his mission came to light. The Qin ruler was about to kill him, but Zheng Guo said, "It is true that I came here originally with underhanded intentions. But if the canal is completed, it will profit the state of Qin as well!"

秦以为然，卒使就渠。
秦国以为他说得对，最后命他继续把渠修成。
The Qin ruler, deciding that this was sensible, in the end allowed him to go ahead with the canal.

渠就，用注填阏之水，溉泽卤之地四万馀顷，收皆亩一钟。
渠成后，引淤积混浊的泾河水灌溉两岸低洼的盐碱地四万多顷，亩产都达到了六石四斗。
When it was finished, it was used to spread muddy silt-laden water over more than 40,000 qing of land in the area which up until this time had been very brackish, bringing the yield of the land up to one zhong per acre (m).

於是关中为沃野，无凶年，秦以富彊，卒并诸侯，因命曰郑国渠。
从此关中沃野千里，再没有饥荒年成，秦国富强起来，最后并吞了诸侯各国，因把此渠命名为郑国渠。
As a result the area within the Pass was converted into fertile fields and no longer suffered from lean years; Qin became rich and powerful and eventually was able to conquer all the other feudal lords and unite the empire, in honour of its builder the canal was named Zheng Guo Canal.

汉兴三十九年，孝文时河决酸枣，东溃金隄，於是东郡大兴卒塞之。
汉朝建立后三十九年，到孝文帝时黄河堤决于酸枣县，向东冲溃金堤，于是东郡动员了许多兵卒堵塞决口。
Thirty-nine years after the founding of the Han(168 BC), in the reign of Emperor Wen, the Yellow River overflowed its banks at Suanzao and destroyed the Metal Embankment east of there. Accordingly a large force of labourers was called up in Dong Province to repair the break.

其後四十有馀年，今天子元光之中，而河决於瓠子，东南注钜野，通於淮、泗。
此后过了四十多年，到本朝天子元光年间，黄河在瓠子决口，向东南流入钜野泽，将淮河、泗水连成一片。
Some forty years later, during the era yuanguang(134-129 BC)of the present emperor, the Yellow River broke its banks at Huzi, flowing southeast into the marsh of Juye and joining up with the Huai and Si rivers.

於是天子使汲黯、郑当时兴人徒塞之，辄复坏。
于是天子命汲黯、郑当时调发人夫、罪徒堵塞决口，往往堵塞以后又被冲坏。
The emperor accordingly ordered An and Zheng Dangshi to raise a force of labourers and repair the breach, but no sooner had they done so than the river broke through again.

是时武安侯田蚡为丞相，其奉邑食鄃。鄃居河北，河决而南则鄃无水菑，邑收多。
那时朝中的丞相是武安侯田蚡，他的奉邑是鄃县，以鄃县租税为食。而鄃县在黄河以北，黄河决口水向南流，鄃县没有水灾，收成很好。
At this time Tian Fen, the marquis of Wu'an, was serving as chancellor and his income came from an estate in Shu. Shu is located north of the Yellow River, and since the break was on the southern side, suffered no damage from floods; on the contrary the revenue from the estate actually increased.

蚡言於上曰：“江河之决皆天事，未易以人力为彊塞，塞之未必应天。”而望气用数者亦以为然。於是天子久之不事复塞也。
所以田蚡对皇帝说：“江河决口都是上天的事，不易用人力强加堵塞，即便将决口堵塞了，也未必符合天意。”此外望云气和以术数占卜的人也都这样说。因此天子很长时间没有提堵塞决口的事。
Tian Fen said to the emperor, "Breaks in the banks of the Yangtze and the Yellow River are all the work of Heaven. It is no easy task to stop up such breaks forcibly by human labour, and indeed to do so would hardly be in accord with the will of Heaven." The numerologists and those who interpret the emanations in the sky supported him in this view and the emperor therefore hesitated and for a long time made no further attempts to repair the break.

是时郑当时为大农，言曰：“异时关东漕粟从渭中上，度六月而罢，而漕水道九百馀里，时有难处。引渭穿渠起长安，并南山下，至河三百馀里，径，易漕，度可令三月罢；而渠下民田万馀顷，又可得以溉田：此损漕省卒，而益肥关中之地，得穀。”
那时郑当时任大司农职，说道：“往常从关东漕运的粮食是沿渭水逆流而上，运到长安估计要用六个月，水路全程九百多里，途中还有许多难行的地方。若从长安开一条渠引渭水，沿南山而下，直到黄河才三百多里，是一条直道，容易行船，估计可使漕船三个月运到；而且沿渠农田一万多顷得到灌溉。这样既能减少漕省运粮的兵卒，节省开支，又能使关中农田更加肥沃，多打粮食。”
At this time Zheng Dangshi, who was serving as minister of agriculture, said to the emperor, "Up to now grain from east of the Pass has been brought to the capital by being transported up the Wei River. The operation requires six months to complete and the course is over 900 li and beset with dangerous places. Now if we were to dig a canal from the Wei River, beginning at Chang'an and following along the Southern Mountains to the Yellow River, the distance could be reduced to something over 300 li. We would have a much easier route for transporting grain, and the trip could be accomplished in three months. Moreover, the people living along the canal could utilize the water to irrigate over 10,000 qing of farmland. Thus we could reduce the time and labour required to haul grain and at the same time increase the fertility of the lands within the Pass and obtain a higher yield."

天子以为然，令齐人水工徐伯表，悉发卒数万人穿漕渠，三岁而通。
天子认为说得对，命来自齐地的水利工匠徐伯表测地势，确定河道走向，动员全部兵卒数万人开凿漕渠，历时三年完工。
Approving the plan, the emperor ordered Xu Bo, a water engineer from Qi, to plot the course of the transport canal and called up a force of several hundred thousand labourers to do the digging. After three years of labour, it was opened for use.

通，以漕，大便利。其後漕稍多，而渠下之民颇得以溉田矣。
通水后，用来漕运，果然十分便利。此后漕渠渐渐多起来，渠下的老百姓都颇能得到以水溉田的利益。
in hauling grain and proved extremely beneficial. From this time on grain transport to the capital gradually increased, while the people living along the canal were able to make considerable use of the water to irrigate their fields.

其後河东守番系言：“漕从山东西，岁百馀万石，更砥柱之限，败亡甚多，而亦烦费。穿渠引汾溉皮氏、汾阴下，引河溉汾阴、蒲坂下，度可得五千顷。五千顷故尽河壖弃地，民茭牧其中耳，今溉田之，度可得穀二百万石以上。穀从渭上，与关中无异，而砥柱之东可无复漕。”
后来河东守番系说：“从山东漕运粮米西行入关，每年一百多万石，中间经过砥柱这个行船的禁限地区，有许多漕船船坏人亡，而且运费也太大。若穿渠引汾水灌溉皮氏、汾阴一带的土地，引黄河水灌溉汾阴、蒲坂一带的土地，估计可以造田五千顷。这五千顷田原来都是河边被遗弃的荒地，老百姓只在其中打草放牧，如今加以灌溉耕种，估计可得粮食二百万石以上。这些粮食沿渭水运入长安，与直接从关中收获的没有两样，而不再从砥柱以东漕粮入关。”
After this, Pan Xi, the governor of Hedong, said to the emperor, "Every year over 1,000,000 piculs of grain are transported to the capital from the area east of the mountains. Since it is brought up the Yellow River, it must be shipped through the dangerous narrows at Dizhu Mountain, where much of it is lost, and in addition the cost of transportation is very high. Now if we were to dig canals from the Fen River to irrigate the region of Pishi and parts of Fenyin, and other canals from the Yellow River to irrigate Puban and the rest of Fenyin, I believe we could bring 5,000 qing of land under cultivation. At present this region is nothing more than a strip of uncultivated land along the Yellow River where the people graze their flocks but, if it were turned into irrigated fields, I think it could be made to yield over 2,000,000 piculs of grain. This could be transported up the Wei River to the capital and would be no more expensive than grain produced in the area within the Pass. It would then no longer be necessary to haul grain from the east past the dangerous part of the river at Dizhu."

天子以为然，发卒数万人作渠田。
天子同意他的意见，动员兵卒数万人造渠田。
The emperor considered this a sound idea and called up a force of 20,000 or 30,000 labourers who worked for several years digging canals and opening up the fields.

数岁，河移徙，渠不利，则田者不能偿种。
几年以后，黄河改道，渠无水，种渠田的连政府贷给的种子也难以偿还。
But the Yellow River changed its course so that the water did not flow into the canals properly and the farmers who worked the newly opened fields were unable to produce enough to repay the cost of planting.

久之，河东渠田废，予越人，令少府以为稍入。
久而久之，河东渠田完全报废，朝廷把它分给从越地内迁的百姓耕种，使少府能从中得到一点微薄的租赋收入。
After some time therefore, the newly opened canals and fields in Hedong were abandoned and the area was turned over to settlers from the state of Yue. What little revenue it produced was allotted to the privy treasury.

其後人有上书欲通襃斜道及漕事，下御史大夫张汤。汤问其事，因言：“抵蜀从故道，故道多阪，回远。今穿襃斜道，少阪，近四百里；而襃水通沔，斜水通渭，皆可以行船漕。漕从南阳上沔入襃，襃之绝水至斜，间百馀里，以车转，从斜下下渭。如此，汉中之穀可致，山东从沔无限，便於砥柱之漕。且襃斜材木竹箭之饶，拟於巴蜀。”
以后有人上书，是为了想打通褒斜道以及漕运的事，天子交给御史大夫张汤，张汤详细了解后，说道：“从汉中入蜀向来走故道，故道有许多山坂大坡，曲折路远。今若凿穿褒斜道，山坂坡路少，比故道近四百里的路程；而且褒水与沔水相通，斜水与渭水相通，都能通行漕船。漕船从南阳沿沔水上行驶入褒水，从褒水登陆到斜水旱路一百多里，以车转运，再下船顺斜水下行驶入渭水。这样不但汉中的粮食可以运来，山东的粮食从沔水而上没有禁限，比经砥柱漕运方便。而且褒斜地区的木材箭竹，其富饶可以与巴蜀相比拟。”
Following this, someone sent a letter to the throne proposing that a road be opened up between the Bao and Ye rivers, and that they be used to transport grain. The emperor referred the proposal to the imperial secretary Zhang Tan, who, after conducting an inquiry, reported as follows: “At present anyone wishing to travel to the province of Shu must go over the Old Road, a very long and roundabout route beset with steep places. Now if the Bao and Ye rivers were dredged and a road opened between them, it would provide a much more level route and the distance could be reduced to about 400 li. The Bao River runs into the Han River and the Ye River runs into the Wei, both of which can be used for transport grain. Therefore grain could be brought from Nanyang up the Mian River and into the Bao, and where the Bao ends it could be transported overland by carts for a distance of 100 or so li to where the Ye begins, and from there down the Wei to Chang'an. Thus grain from Hanzhong could be brought to the capital. At the same time, by making use of the Mian River, grain could be transported from east of the mountains in unlimited quantities and the route would be much more convenient than the present one up the Yellow River and through the narrows at Dizhu. Moreover, the region of the Bao and Ye is as rich in timber and bamboo as the provinces of Ba and Shu."

天子以为然，拜汤子卬为汉中守，发数万人作襃斜道五百馀里。
天子认为有道理，封张汤的儿子卬为汉中郡太守，调发数万人开出一条长五百多里的褒斜道。
The emperor approved the proposal and appointed Zhang Tang's son Zhang Ang as governor of Hanzhong, calling up a force of 20,000 or 50,000 labourers and setting them to work constructing the Bao and Ye road and waterway which extended more than 500 li.

道果便近，而水湍石，不可漕。
果然方便而且路程近，但是水流湍急多石，不能通漕。
When the road was finished it did in fact prove to be much shorter and more convenient than the old route, but the rivers were too full of rapids and boulders to be used for transporting grain.

其後庄熊罴言：“临晋民原穿洛以溉重泉以东万馀顷故卤地。诚得水，可令亩十石。”
此后庄熊罴说：“临晋地区的老百姓愿意凿穿洛水筑成水渠，用来灌溉重泉以东原有的一万多顷盐碱地。倘若果然能得水灌溉，可使每亩产量达到十石。”
Following this, a man named Zhuang Xiongpi reported to the emperor that the people of Linjin wished to dig a canal from the Luo River to be used to irrigate some 10,000 qing of land east of Chongquan. The land in this area was brackish, but the people believed that if it could be irrigated with water led in from the Luo River, it could be made to produce ten piculs per acre.

於是为发卒万馀人穿渠，自徵引洛水至商颜山下。
于是调发兵卒一万多人开渠，自徵城引洛水到商颜山下。
The emperor therefore called up a labour force of over 10,000 men and set them to work digging a canal leading off from the Luo River at Zheng and extending to the foot of Mt.Shangyan.

岸善崩，乃凿井，深者四十馀丈。往往为井，井下相通行水。
由于土岸容易塌方，于是沿流凿井，最深有的达到四十多丈。许多地方都凿了井，井下相互连通，使水通行。
There, however, it was found that the banks of the canal kept collapsing, so the men dug wells, some of them over forty zhang deep, at various points along the course and induced the water to flow from one well to another.

水穨以绝商颜，东至山岭十馀里间。井渠之生自此始。
水从地下穿商颜山而过，东行直到山岭之中十多里远。从此产生了井渠。
Thus the water disappeared from sight at Mt Shangyan and flowed underground to the eastern side of the mountain, a distance of over ten li. This was the beginning of the so-called well canals.

穿渠得龙骨，故名曰龙首渠。
凿渠时曾掘出了龙骨，所以给此渠命名为龙首渠。
In the course of the digging a dragon bone was discovered and the canal was therefore named Dragon Head Canal.

作之十馀岁，渠颇通，犹未得其饶。
这条渠筑了十多年，颇有些地方通了水，但是并未得到太大的好处。
It has been over ten years now since it was constructed but, although the water flows through it fairly well, the land has not yet shown much improvement.

自河决瓠子後二十馀岁，岁因以数不登，而梁楚之地尤甚。
自从黄河在瓠子决口后二十多年，每年土地都因水涝没有好收成，梁楚地区更为严重。
More than twenty years had passed since the Yellow River broke through its banks at Huzi. The break had not been repaired and the harvests were frequently poor, the damage being particularly severe in Liang and Chu.

天子既封禅巡祭山川，其明年，旱，乾封少雨。
天子既已封禅，并巡祭了天下名山大川，第二年，天由于要晒干泰山封土而少雨。
The emperor, having gone east to perform the Feng and Shan sacrifices(110 BC), made a tour through the empire, sacrificing to various mountains and rivers. The following year(109 BC) there was a drought (the purpose of which, it was said, was to dry out the earth of the altar mound constructed for the Feng sacrifice) and very little rain fell.

天子乃使汲仁、郭昌发卒数万人塞瓠子决。
于是命汲仁、郭昌调发兵卒数万人堵塞瓠子决口，阻止水涝。
The emperor ordered Ji Ren and Guo Chang to raise a force of 20,000 or 30,000 men and close the break in the banks of the Yellow River at Huzi.

於是天子已用事万里沙，则还自临决河，沈白马玉璧于河，令群臣从官自将军已下皆负薪窴决河。
天子从万里沙祠祷神以后，回来的路上亲临黄河决口处，沉白马、玉璧于河中祭奠河神，命群臣及随从官员自将军衔以下，都背负柴薪，填塞决口。
while he himself went east to pray for rain at the Altar of the Ten Thousand Mile Sands. On his way back to the capital he stopped to inspect the break in person and cast offerings of jade and a white horse into the river. He ordered all the courtiers and ministers who were accompanying him, from the generals on down, to carry bundles of brushwood and help close the break in the embankment.

是时东郡烧草，以故薪柴少，而下淇园之竹以为楗。
当时东郡百姓以草为炊，柴薪很少，因而命砍伐淇园的竹子作为塞决口的楗。
As it happened, the people of Dong Province had just burned off all their grasslands, so there was very little brushwood to be found in the area. The workmen were therefore obliged to sink lengths of bamboo from the Qi Park to form a weir across the opening.

天子既临河决，悼功之不成，乃作歌曰：“瓠子决兮将柰何？皓皓旰旰兮闾殚为河！殚为河兮地不得宁，功无已时兮吾山平。吾山平兮钜野溢，鱼沸郁兮柏冬日。延道弛兮离常流，蛟龙骋兮方远游。归旧川兮神哉沛，不封禅兮安知外！为我谓河伯兮何不仁，泛滥不止兮愁吾人？齧桑浮兮淮、泗满，久不反兮水维缓。”
天子既然亲临决河处，悼念塞河不能成功，作歌道：“瓠子河决啊有何办法，浩浩汗汗啊民居已尽为河。尽为河啊地方不安，河工无休止啊吾山已经凿平。吾山已平啊钜野泽外流，水族喧嚷啊迫天齐日。河道废弛啊水离常流，蛟龙驰骋啊正远游。水归旧道啊神福滂沛，若不封禅啊怎知此事！为我告河伯啊因何不仁，泛滥不止啊愁煞人。河浸齧桑啊淮、泗水满，久不归故道啊唯愿水流稍缓。”
As the emperor surveyed the break he was filled with despair at the difficulty of the task and composed this song: "The river broke through at Huzi; What could we do? Beneath its rushing waves, Villages all became rivers. The villages have all become rivers, And there is no safety for the land. Our labours know no rest, Our mountains crumble. Our mountains crumble, And the marsh of Juye overflows. Even the fish lament, As the winter days press near. The river raged from its boundaries, It has left its constant course. Dragons and water monsters leap forth, Free to wander afar. Let it return to the old channel, And we will truly bless the gods. But for my journey to the Feng and Shan, How would I have known what it was like? Ask the Lord of the River for me, 'Why are you so cruel? Your surging inundations will not cease: You grieve my people! The city of Niesang is awash, The Huai and Si brim over. So long, and yet you will not return· You overstep the watery bounds!'"

一曰：“河汤汤兮激潺湲，北渡污兮浚流难。搴长茭兮沈美玉，河伯许兮薪不属。薪不属兮卫人罪，烧萧条兮噫乎何以御水！穨林竹兮楗石菑，宣房塞兮万福来。”
另一首是：“河水汤汤啊流急，北渡回曲啊疏浚难。揭草埽于决口啊沉美玉于河，河伯纵许息水啊奈薪柴不足。薪柴不足啊卫人获罪，民烧柴尚不足啊如何御水！伐淇园之竹啊楗阻石柱，堵塞宣房啊万福来。”
Another song: "The river rushes on, Its wild waters tossing. It swirls back to the north, A swift and dangerous torrent. We bring the long stakes, And cast the precious jade, The Lord of the River hears our plea, But there is not enough brushwood. There is not enough brushwood - The fault of the people of Wei. They have wasted the land with fire - What can we use to check the waters? We sink the forest bamboo, And pile the weir with stones. We will stem the break at Xuanfang, And bring ten thousand blessings!"

於是卒塞瓠子，筑宫其上，名曰宣房宫。
于是塞住了瓠子决河，在决口处筑了一座宫殿，取名为宣房宫。
Thus they finally succeeded in closing the gap at Huzi and built a temple on top of the embankment called the Temple of Xuanfang.

而道河北行二渠，复禹旧迹，而梁、楚之地复宁，无水灾。
并修二条渠引河水北行，恢复了禹时的样子，梁、楚地区重又得到安宁，没有水灾了。
They led the water of the river off to the north in two channels so that it returned to the course it had followed in the time of Emperor Yu. Safety was restored to the regions of Liang and Chu, and they no longer suffered any damage from flood waters.

自是之後，用事者争言水利。
从此以后，负责河渠事的官员争相建议修筑水利。
After this the men who were concerned with such affairs all rushed to the emperor with proposals for utilizing the rivers to greater advantage.

朔方、西河、河西、酒泉皆引河及川谷以溉田；
朔方、西河、河西、酒泉等地都引黄河以及川谷中的水灌溉农田；
As a result canals were dug in Shuofang, Xihe, Hexi, and Jiuquan to draw off water from the Yellow River or smaller rivers in the valleys and use it to irrigate the fields.

而关中辅渠、灵轵引堵水；
而关中的辅渠、灵轵渠引诸川中的水；
Within the Pass the Fu and Lingzhi canals were constructed, making use of the water of various rivers in the region.

汝南、九江引淮；东海引钜定；泰山下引汶水：皆穿渠为溉田，各万馀顷。
汝南、九江地区引淮河水；东海郡引钜定泽水；泰山周围地区引汶水。各自所开渠都能灌溉农田万余顷。
in Runan and Jiujiang water was drawn off from the Huai River: the Donghai from the marsh of Juding: and at the foot of Mt.Tai from the Wen River. In all these places canals were dug to water the fields, providing irrigation for over 10,000 qing of land in each area.

佗小渠披山通道者，不可胜言。然其著者在宣房。
其他小渠以及劈山通水道的，不可尽言。但工程最大的还是宣房治河的工程。
In addition many other small canals and waterways through the mountains were opened up, but they are too numerous to describe here. Of all these exploits, however, the most outstanding was the closing of the break in the Yellow River at Xuanfang.

太史公曰：余南登庐山，观禹疏九江，遂至于会稽太湟，上姑苏，望五湖；东闚洛汭、大邳，迎河，行淮、泗、济、漯洛渠；西瞻蜀之岷山及离碓；北自龙门至于朔方。曰：甚哉，水之为利害也！
太史公说：“我曾南行登上庐山，观看禹疏导九江的遗迹，随后到会稽太湟，上姑苏台，眺望五湖；东行考察了洛汭、大邳，逆河而上，走过淮、泗、济、漯、洛诸水；西行瞻望了西蜀地区的岷山和离堆；北行自龙门走到朔方。深切感到：水与人的利害关系太大了！
The Grand Historian remarks: I have climbed Mt.Lu in the south to observe the courses which Emperor Yu opened up for the nine tributaries of the Yangtze. From there I journeyed to Kuai and Taihuang and, ascending the heights of Gusu, looked out over the Five Lakes. In the east I have visited the confluence of the Yellow and Luo rivers, Dapei, and the Backward-flowing River, and have travelled along the waterways of the Huai, Si, Ji, Ta, and Luo rivers. In the west I have seen Mt.Min and the Li Escarpment in the province of Shu, and I have journeyed through the north from Longmen to Shuofang. How tremendous are the benefits brought by these bodies of water, and how terrible the damages!

余从负薪塞宣房，悲瓠子之诗而作河渠书。
我随从皇帝参加了负薪塞宣房决口那件事，为皇帝所作《瓠子》感到悲伤，因而写下了《河渠书》。
I was among those who carried bundles of brushwood on their backs to stem the break at Xuanfang and, deeply moved by the song of Huzi, I made this treatise on the Yellow River and the Canals。