高祖，沛丰邑中阳里人，姓刘氏，字季。
高祖是沛郡丰邑县中阳里人，姓刘，字季。
Kao-tsu was a native of the community of Chungyang in the city of Feng, the district of P'ei. His family name was Liu and his polite name Chi.

父曰太公，母曰刘媪。
他的父亲是太公，母亲是刘媪。
His father was known as the "Venerable Sire" and his mother as "Dame Liu."

其先，刘媪尝息大泽之陂，梦与神遇。
高祖未出生之前，刘媪曾经在大泽的岸边休息，梦中与神交合。
Before he was born, Dame Liu was one day resting on the bank of a large pond when she dreamed that she encountered a god.

是时雷电晦冥，太公往视，则见蛟龙于其上。
当时雷鸣电闪，天昏地暗，太公正好前去看她，见到有蛟龙在她身上。
At this time the sky grew dark and was filled with thunder and lightning. When Kao-tsu's father went to look for her, he saw a scaly dragon over the place where she was lying.

已而有身，遂产高祖。
不久，刘媪有了身孕，生下了高祖。
After this she became pregnant and gave birth to Kao-tsu.

高祖为人，隆准而龙颜，美须髯，左股有七十二黑子。
高祖这个人，高鼻子，一副龙的容貌，一脸漂亮的胡须，左腿上有七十二颗黑痣。
Kao-tsu had a prominent nose and a dragonlike face, with beautiful whiskers on his chin and cheeks; on his left thigh he had seventy-two black moles.

仁而爱人，喜施，意豁如也。
他仁厚爱人，喜欢施舍，心胸豁达。
He was kind and affectionate with others, liked to help people, and was very understanding.

常有大度，不事家人生产作业。
他平素具有干大事业的气度，不干平常人家生产劳作的事。
He always had great ideas and paid little attention to the business the rest of his family was engaged in.

及壮，试为吏，为泗水亭长，廷中吏无所不狎侮。
到了成年以后，他试着去做官，当了泗水亭这个地方的亭长，对官署中的官吏，没有不加捉弄的。
When he grew up he took the examination to become an official and was made village head of Ssu River. He treated all the other officials in the office with familiarity and disdain.

好酒及色。
他喜欢喝酒，好女色。
He was fond of wine and women.

常从王媪、武负贳酒，醉卧，武负、王媪见其上常有龙，怪之。
常常到王媪、武负那里去赊酒喝，喝醉了躺倒就睡，武负、王媪看到他身上常有龙出现，觉得这个人很奇怪。
He often used to go to Dame Wang's or old lady Wu and drink on credit. When he got drunk and lay down to sleep, the old women, to their great wonder, would always see something like a dragon over the place where he was sleeping.

高祖每酤留饮，酒雠数倍。
高祖每次去买酒，留在店中畅饮，买酒的人就会增加，售出去的酒达到平常的几倍。
Whenever he would drink and stay at their shops, they would sell several times as much wine as usual.

及见怪，岁竟，此两家常折券弃责。
等到看见了有龙出现的怪现象，到了年终，这两家就把记帐的简札折断，不再向高祖讨帐。
Because of these strange happenings, when the end of the year came around the old women would always destroy Kao-tsu's credit slips and clear his account.

高祖常繇咸阳，纵观，观秦皇帝，喟然太息曰：“嗟乎，大丈夫当如此也！”
高祖曾经到咸阳去服徭役，有一次秦始皇出巡，允许人们随意观看，他看到了秦始皇，长叹一声说：“唉，大丈夫就应该象这样！”
Kao-tsu was once sent on corvée labor to the capital city of Hsien-yang and happened to have an opportunity to see the First Emperor of Ch'in. When he saw him he sighed and said, "Ah, this is the way a great man should be."

单父人吕公善沛令，避仇从之客，因家沛焉。
单父人吕公与沛县县令要好，为躲避仇人投奔到县令这里来作客，于是就在沛县安了家。
There was a man of Shan-fu, one Master Lü, who was a friend of the magistrate of P'ei. In order to avoid the consequences of a feud, he accepted the hospitality of the magistrate and made his home in P'ei.

沛中豪桀吏闻令有重客，皆往贺。
沛中的豪杰、官吏们听说县令有贵客，都前往祝贺。
When the officials and the wealthy and influential people of P'ei heard that the magistrate had a distinguished guest, they all came to pay their respects.

萧何为主吏，主进，令诸大夫曰：“进不满千钱，坐之堂下。”
萧何当时是县令的属官，掌管收贺礼事宜，他对那些送礼的宾客们说：“送礼不满千金的，让他坐到堂下。”
Hsiao Ho, being the director of officials, was in charge of gifts and informed those who came to call that anyone bringing a gift of less than one thousand cash would be seated below the main hall.

高祖为亭长，素易诸吏，乃绐为谒曰“贺钱万”，实不持一钱。
高祖做亭长，平素就看不起这帮官吏，于是在进见的名帖上谎称“贺钱一万”，其实他一个钱也没带。
Kao-tsu, who as a village head was in the habit of treating the other officials with contempt, falsely wrote on his calling card: "With respects - ten thousand cash," though in fact he did not have a single cash.

谒入，吕公大惊，起，迎之门。
名帖递进去了，吕公见了高祖大为吃惊，赶快起身，到门口去迎接他。
When his card was sent in, Master Lü was very surprised and got up and came to the gate to greet him.

吕公者，好相人，见高祖状貌，因重敬之，引入坐。
吕公这个人，喜欢给人相面，看见高祖的相貌，就非常敬重他，把他领到堂上坐下。
Master Lü was very good at reading people's faces and when he saw Kao-tsu's features he treated him with great honor and respect and led him in to a seat.

萧何曰：“刘季固多大言，少成事。”
萧何说：“刘季一向满口说大话，很少做成什么事。”
"Liu Chi," remarked Hsiao Ho, "does a good deal of fine talking, but so far has accomplished very little."

高祖因狎侮诸客，遂坐上坐，无所诎。
高祖就趁机戏弄那些宾客，干脆就坐到上座去，一点儿也不谦让。
But Kao-tsu, disdainning the other guests, proceeded to take a seat of honor without further ado.

酒阑，吕公因目固留高祖。
酒喝得尽兴了，吕公于是向高祖递眼色，让他一定留下来。
When the drinking was nearly over, Master Lü glanced at Kao-tsu in such a way as to indicate that he should stay a while longer.

高祖竟酒，后。
高祖喝完了酒，就留在后面。
so Kao-tsu dawdled over his wine.

吕公曰：“臣少好相人，相人多矣，无如季相，愿季自爱，臣有息女，愿为季箕帚妾。”
吕公说：“我从年轻的时候就喜欢给人相面，经我给相面的人多了，没有谁能比得上你刘季的面相，希望你好自珍爱。我有一个亲生女儿，愿意许给你做你的洒扫妻妾。”
"Since my youth," said Master Lü, "I have been fond of reading faces. I have read many faces, but none with signs like yours. You must take good care of yourself, I beg you. I have a daughter whom I hope you will do me the honor of accepting as your wife."

酒罢，吕媪怒吕公曰：“公始常欲奇此女，与贵人，沛令善公，求之不与，何自妄许与刘季？”
酒宴散了，吕媪对吕公大为恼火，说：“你起初总是想让这个女儿出人头地，把他许配给个贵人。沛县县令跟你要好，想娶这个女儿你不同意，今天你为什么随随便便地就把她许给刘季了呢？”
When the party was over, Dame Lü was very angry with her husband. "You have always idolized this girl and planned to marry her to some person of distinction," she said. "The magistrate of P'ei is a friend of yours and has asked for her, but you would not give your consent. How can you be so insane as to give her to Liu Chi?"

吕公曰：“此非儿女子所知也。”
吕公说：“这不是女人家所懂得的。”
"This is not the sort of thing women and children can understand!" replied Master Lü.

卒与刘季。
终于把女儿嫁给刘季了。
Eventually he married the girl to Kao-tsu.

吕公女乃吕后也，生孝惠帝、鲁元公主。
吕公的女儿就是吕后，生了孝惠帝和鲁元公主。
and it was this daughter of Master Lü who became Empress Lü and gave birth to Emperor Hui and Princess Yuan of Lu.

高祖为亭长时，常告归之田。
高祖做亭长的时候，经常请假回家到田里去。
When Kao-tsu was acting as village head he once asked for leave to go home and visit his fields.

吕后与两子居田中耨，有一老父过请饮，吕后因餔之。
有一次吕后和孩子正在田中除草，有一老汉从这里经过讨水喝，吕后让他喝了水，还拿饭给他吃。
Empress Lü at the time was in the fields weeding with her two children. When an old man passed by and asked for something to drink, Empress Lü accordingly gave him some food.

老父相吕后曰：“夫人天下贵人。”
老汉给吕后相面说：“夫人真是天下的贵人。”
The old man examined her face and said, "Madam will become the most honored woman in the world."

令相两子，见孝惠，曰：“夫人所以贵者，乃此男也。”
吕后又让他给两个孩子相面，他见了孝惠帝，说：“夫人所以显贵，正是因为这个男孩子。”
She asked him to examine her children. Looking at her son, he said, "It is because of this boy that madam will obtain honor."

相鲁元，亦皆贵。
他又给鲁元相面，也同样是富贵面相。
and when he examined the girl, he said that she too would be honored.

老父已去，高祖适从旁舍来，吕后具言客有过，相我子母皆大贵。
老汉走后，高祖正巧从旁边的房舍走来，吕后就把刚才那老人经过此地，给她们看相，说他们母子都是富贵之相的情况，原原本本地告诉了高祖。
After the old man had gone on, Kao-tsu happened to appear from an outhouse nearby. Empress Lü told him all about how the traveler had passed by and, examining her and her children, had predicted great honor for all of them.

高祖问，曰：“未远。”
高祖问这个人在哪，吕后说：“还走不远。”
When Kao-tsu inquired where the man was, she replied, "He cannot have gone very far away!"

乃追及，问老父。
于是高祖就去追上了老汉，问他刚才的事。
Kao-tsu ran after the old man and, overtaking him, questioned him.

老父曰：“乡者夫人、婴儿皆似君，君相贵不可言。”
老汉说：“刚才我看贵夫人及子女的面相都很像您，您的面相简直是贵不可言。”
"The lady and the little children I examined a while ago," he replied, "all resemble you. But when I examine your face, I find such worth that I cannot express it in words!"

高祖乃谢曰：“诚如父言，不敢忘德。”
高祖于是道谢说：“如果真的象老人家所说，我决不会忘记你的恩德。”
Kao-tsu thanked him, saying, "If it is really as you say, I will surely not forget your kindness!"

及高祖贵，遂不知老父处。
等到高祖显贵的时候，始终不知道老汉的去处。
but when Kao-tsu finally became honored he could never find out where the old man had gone.

高祖为亭长，乃以竹皮为冠，令求盗之薛治之，时时冠之。
高祖做亭长时，喜欢戴用竹皮编成的帽子，他让掌管捕盗的差役到薛地去制做，经常戴着。
When Kao-tsu was acting as village head, he fashioned a kind of hat out of sheaths of bamboo and sent his "thief-seeker" to the district of Hsieh to have some made up for him, which he wore from time to time.

及贵常冠，所谓“刘氏冠”乃是也。
到后来显贵了，仍旧经常戴着。人们所说的“刘氏冠”，指的就是这种帽子。
Even after he became famous he continued to wear these hats. These are the so-called Liu family hats.

高祖以亭长为县送徒郦山，徒多道亡。
高祖以亭长的身份为沛县押送徒役去郦山，徒役们有很多在半路逃走了。
As village head Kao-tsu was ordered to escort a group of forced laborers from the district of P'ei to Mount Li. On the way, however, so many of the laborers ran away.

自度比至皆亡之。
高祖估计等到了郦山也就会都逃光了。
that Kao-tsu began to suspect that by the time he reached his destination they would all have disappeared.

到丰西泽中，止饮，夜乃解纵所送徒。
所以走到丰西大泽中时，就停下来饮酒，趁着夜晚把所有的役徒都放了。
When they had reached a place in the midst of a swamp west of Feng, Kao-tsu halted and began to drink. That night he loosened the bonds of the laborers he was escorting and freed them.

曰：“公等皆去，吾亦从此逝矣！”
高祖说：“你们都逃命去吧，从此我也要远远地走了！”
saying, "Go, all of you! I too shall go my own way from here."

徒中壮士愿从者十余人。
徒役中有十多个壮士愿意跟随他一块走。
Among the laborers were ten or so brave men who asked to go with him.

高祖被酒，夜径泽中，令一人行前。
高祖乘着酒意，夜里抄小路通过沼泽地，让一个在前边先走。
Kao-tsu, full of wine, led the men in the night along a path through the swamp, sending one of them to walk ahead.

行前者还报曰：“前有大蛇当径，愿还。”
走在前边的人回来报告说：“前边有条大蛇挡在路上，还是回去罢。”
The man who had gone ahead returned and reported, "There is a great snake lying across the path ahead. I beg you to turn back!"

高祖醉，曰：“壮士行，何畏！”
高祖已醉，说：“大丈夫走路，有什么可怕的！”
"Where a brave man marches what is there to fear?" replied Kao-tsu drunkenly.

乃前，拔剑击斩蛇。
于是赶到前面，拔剑去斩大蛇。
and, advancing, drew his sword and slashed at the snake.

蛇遂分为两，径开。
大蛇被斩成两截，道路打开了。
After he had cut the snake in two and cleared the path.

行数里，醉，因卧。
继续往前走了几里，醉得厉害了，就躺倒在地上。
he walked on a mile or so and then lay down to sleep off his drunkenness.

后人来至蛇所，有一老妪夜哭。
后边的人来到斩蛇的地方，看见有一老妇在暗夜中哭泣。
When one of the men who had lagged behind came to the place where the snake lay, he found an old woman crying in the night.

人问何哭，妪曰：“人杀吾子，故哭之。”
有人问她为什么哭，老妇人说：“有人杀了我的孩子，我在哭他。”
He asked her why she was crying and she answered, "I am crying because someone has killed my son."

人曰：“妪子何为见杀？”
有人问：“你的孩子为什么被杀呢？”
"How did your son come to be killed?" he asked.

妪曰：“吾子，白帝子也，化为蛇，当道，今为赤帝子斩之，故哭。”
老妇说：“我的孩子是白帝之子，变化成蛇，挡在道路中间，如今被赤帝之子杀了，我就是为这个哭啊。”
"My son was the son of the White Emperor," said the old woman. "He had changed himself into a snake and was lying across the road. Now he has been cut in two by the son of the Red Emperor, and therefore I weep."

人乃以妪为不诚，欲告之，妪因忽不见。
众人以为老妇人是在说谎，正要打她，老妇人却忽然不见了。
The man did not believe the old woman and was about to accuse her of lying, when suddenly she disappeared.

后人至，高祖觉。
后面的人赶上了高祖，高祖醒了。
When the man caught up with Kao-tsu, he found him already awake.

后人告高祖，高祖乃心独喜，自负。
那些人把刚才的事告诉了高祖，高祖心中暗暗高兴，更加自负。
and reported what had happened. Kao-tsu was very pleased in his heart and set great store by the incident.

诸从者日益畏之。
那些追随他的人也渐渐地畏惧他了。
while his followers day by day regarded him with greater awe.

秦始皇帝常曰：“东南有天子气”，于是因东游以厌之。
秦始皇帝曾说：“东南方有象征天子的一团云气”，于是巡游东方，想借此把它压下去。
The First Emperor of Chin, repeatedly declaring that there were signs in the southeastern sky indicating the presence of a "Son of Heaven," decided to journey east to suppress the threat to his power.

高祖即自疑，亡匿，隐于芒、砀山泽岩石之间。
高祖怀疑自己带着这团云气，就逃到外边躲避起来，躲在芒山、砀山一带的深山湖泽之间。
Kao-tsu, suspecting that he himself was the cause of the visit, fled into hiding among the rocky wastes of the mountains and swamps between Mang and Tang.

吕后与人俱求，常得之。
吕后和别人一起去找，常常能找到他。
Empress Lü and others who went with her to look for him, however, were always able to find him.

高祖怪问之。
高祖奇怪地问她怎么能找到。
Kao-tsu, wondering how she could do this, asked her.

吕后曰：“季所居上常有云气，故从往常得季。”
吕后说：“你所在的地方，上空常有一团云气，顺着去找就常常能找到你。”
and she replied, "There are always signs in the clouds over the place where you are. By following these we manage to find you every time."

高祖心喜。
高祖心里更加欢喜。
Kao-tsu was very pleased in his heart.

沛中子弟或闻之，多欲附者矣。
沛县的年轻人中有人听说了这件事，因此许多人都愿意依附于他。
When word of this circulated among the young men of the district of Pei, many of them sought to become his followers.

秦二世元年秋，陈胜等起蕲，至陈而王，号为“张楚”。
秦二世元年的秋天，陈胜等在蕲县起事，打到陈的时候，自称为王，定国号为“张楚”。
In the autumn of the first year of the reign of the Second Emperor of Chin, Ch'en She and his band arose in Chi. When Ch'en She had reached the area of Ch'en and made himself a king with the title of "Magnifier of Ch'u".

诸郡县皆多杀其长吏以应陈涉。
许多郡县都杀了他们的长官来响应陈涉。
many of the provinces and districts murdered their head officials and joined in the rebellion.

沛令恐，欲以沛应涉。
沛县县令非常惊恐，也想率领沛县的人响应陈涉。
The magistrate of Pei, fearful of what might happen, wished to declare Pei a party to the rebellion.

掾、主吏萧何、曹参乃曰：“君为秦吏，今欲背之，率沛子弟，恐不听。愿君召诸亡在外者，可得数百人，因劫众，众不敢不听。”
于是狱掾曹参、主吏萧何说：“您作为秦朝的官吏，现在想背叛秦朝，率领沛县的子弟起义，恐怕没有人会听从命令。希望您召回那些在外逃亡的人，大约可召集到几百人，用他们来胁迫众人，众人就不敢不听从命令了。”
but his chief officials Hsiao Ho and Ts'ao Ts'an said, "You are an official of Chin. Now, though you hope to turn your back on Chin and lead the men of Pei, we fear they will not listen to you. We would suggest that you summon all the various men who have fled and are in hiding elsewhere. You should be able to obtain several hundred men, and with these you can threaten the rest of the people and force them to obey you."

乃令樊哙召刘季。
于是派樊哙去叫刘季。
Accordingly the magistrate sent Fan K'ua to summon Kao-tsu.

刘季之众已数十百人矣。
这时，刘季的追随者已经有几十人或者到一百人了。
who by this time had almost a hundred followers.

于是樊哙从刘季来。
樊哙跟着刘季一块儿回来了。
Kao-tsu came with Fan K'ua.

沛令后悔，恐其有变，乃闭城城守，欲诛萧、曹。
沛令在樊哙走后后悔了，害怕刘季来了会发生什么变故，就关闭城门，据守城池，不让刘季进城，而且想要杀掉萧何、曹参。
but the magistrate, repenting his action and fearing a move against himself, closed the gates and guarded the city, preparing to execute Hsiao Ho and Ts'ao Ts'an.

萧、曹恐，逾城保刘季。
萧何、曹参害怕了，越过城池来依附刘季，以求得保护。
Hsiao Ho and Ts'ao Ts'an, in fear, climbed over the wall and fled to Kao-tsu's protection.

刘季乃书帛射城上，谓沛父老曰：“天下苦秦久矣。今父老虽为沛令守，诸侯并起，今屠沛。沛今共诛令，择子弟可立者立之，以应诸侯，则家室完。不然，父子俱屠，无为也。”
于是刘季用帛写了封信射到城上去，向沛县的父老百姓宣告说：“天下百姓为秦政所苦已经很久了。现在父老们虽然为沛令守城，但是各地诸侯全都起来了，现在很快就要屠戮到沛县。如果现在沛县父老一起把沛令杀掉，从年轻人中选择可以拥立的人立他为首领，来响应各地诸侯，那么你们的家室就可得到保全。不然的话，全县老少都要遭屠杀，那时就什么也做不成了。”
Kao-tsu then wrote a message on a piece of silk and shot it over the city wall, saying, "The world has long suffered beneath Chin. Now, though you men of Pei should guard the city for the sake of the magistrate, the other nobles who have risen in rebellion will join in massacring the inhabitants of the city. If you will unite and do away with the magistrate, select from among your sons a worthy man to be your leader and declare yourselves with the other nobles, then your homes and families shall all be spared. But if you do not, you will all be massacred without further ado!"

父老乃率子弟共杀沛令，开城门迎刘季，欲以为沛令。
于是沛县父老率领县中子弟一起杀掉了沛令，打开城门迎接刘季，想要让他当沛县县令。
The elders then led the young men and together they murdered the magistrate of Pei, opened the city gates, and welcomed Kao-tsu. They wished to make him magistrate.

刘季曰：“天下方扰，诸侯并起，今置将不善，一败涂地。吾非敢自爱，恐能薄，不能完父兄子弟。此大事，愿更相推择可者。”
刘季说：“如今正当乱世，诸侯纷纷起事，如果安排将领人选不妥当，就将一败涂地。我并不敢顾惜自己的性命，只是怕自己能力小，不能保全父老兄弟。这是一件大事，希望大家一起推选出能胜任的人。”
but Kao-tsu announced, "The world today is in chaos with the nobles rising up everywhere. If you do not make a wise choice of a leader now, you will be cut down in one stroke and your blood will drench the earth. It is not that I care for my own safety, but only that I fear my abilities are not sufficient to insure your welfare. This is a most serious business. I beg you to consult once more among yourselves and select someone who is truly worthy."

萧、曹等皆文吏，自爱，恐事不就，后秦种族其家，尽让刘季。
萧何、曹参等都是文官，都顾惜性命，害怕起事不成遭到满门抄斩之祸，极力地推让刘季。
Hsiao Ho, Ts'ao Ts'an, and the other civil officials were concerned for their own safety and, fearful that if they assumed leadership and the undertaking proved unsuccessful, Chin would exterminate their families, they all yielded in favor of Kao-tsu.

诸父老皆曰：“平生所闻刘季诸珍怪，当贵；而卜筮之，莫如刘季最吉。”
城中父老也都说：“平素听说刘季那么多奇异之事，必当显贵，而且占卜没有谁比得上你刘季最吉利。”
Then all the elders announced, "For a long time we have heard of the strange and wonderful happenings and the predictions of greatness concerning Liu Chi. Moreover, when we divine by the tortoise and milfoil, we find that no one receives such responses as Liu Chi."

于是刘季数让。
刘季还是再三推让。
With this, Kao-tsu declined several times.

众莫敢为，乃立季为沛公。
众人没有敢当沛县县令的，就立刘季做了沛公。
but, since no one else dared to accept the position, he allowed himself to be made governor of Pei.

祠黄帝，祭蚩尤于沛庭，而衅鼓旗，帜皆赤。
于是在沛县祭祀能定天下的黄帝和善制兵器的蚩尤，把牲血涂在旗鼓上，以祭旗祭鼓，旗帜都是红色的。
He then performed sacrifices to the Yellow Emperor and to the ancient warrior Chih Yu in the district office of Pei and anointed his drums and banners with the blood of the sacrifice. All his flags and banners he had made of red.

由所杀蛇白帝子，杀者赤帝子，故上赤。
这是由于被杀的那条蛇是白帝之子，而杀蛇那个人是赤帝之子，所以崇尚红色。
Because it was the son of the Red Emperor who had killed the snake, the son of the White Emperor, he decided to honor the color red in this fashion.

于是少年豪吏如萧、曹、樊哙等皆为收沛子弟二三千人，攻胡陵、方与，还守丰。
那些年轻有为的官吏如萧何、曹参、樊哙等都为沛公去招收沛县中的年轻人，共招了二三千人，一起攻打胡陵、方与，然后退回驻守丰邑。
The young men and distinguished officials such as Hsiao Ho, Ts'ao Ts'an, Fan K'ua, and others gathered together for him a band of two or three thousand men of Pei and attacked Huling and Fang-yu. They then returned and guarded the city of Feng.

秦二世二年，陈涉之将周章军西至戏而还。
秦二世二年，陈涉手下大将周章率军攻打到戏水，被章邯打败又退回去了。
In the second year of the Second Emperor, Ch'en She's general Chou Wen marched west with his army as far as Hsi and then returned.

燕、赵、齐、魏皆自立为王。
燕、赵、齐、魏各国都自立为王。
Yen, Chao, Chi and Wei all set up their own kings.

项氏起吴。
项梁、项羽在吴县起兵。
and Hsiang Liang and Hsiang Yu began their uprising in Wu.

秦泗川监平将兵围丰，二日，出与战，破之。
秦朝泗川郡监名叫平的率兵包围了丰邑。两天之后，沛公率众出城与秦军交战，打败了秦军。
Chin's overseer in the province of Ssu River, a man named Ping, led a force of troops and surrounded Feng for two days. The governor of Pei marched out of the city and fought and defeated him.

命雍齿守丰，引兵之薛。
沛公命雍齿守卫丰邑，自己率领部队到薛县去。
Then, ordering Yung Ch'ih to guard Feng, he led his troops to Hsieh.

泗川守壮败于薛，走至戚，沛公左司马得泗川守壮，杀之。
泗川郡守壮在薛县被打败，逃到戚县，沛公的左司马抓获泗川郡守壮并杀了他。
The magistrate of Ssu River, Chuang, was defeated at Hsieh and fled to Chi, where the governor Pei's marshal of the left captured and killed him.

沛公还军亢父，至方与，未战。
沛公把军队撤到亢父，一直到方与，没有发生战斗。
The governor of Pei returned and camped in the district of K'ang-fu, proceeding as far as Fang-yu.

陈王使魏人周市略地。
陈王胜派魏国人周市来夺取土地。
Chou Shih was a man of Wei who had been sent by Ch'en She to seize the area.

周市使人谓雍齿曰：“丰，故梁徙也。今魏地已定者数十城。齿今下魏，魏以齿为侯守丰。不下，且屠丰。”
周市派人告诉雍齿说：“丰邑，是过去魏国国都迁来的地方。现在魏地已经平定的有几十座城。你如果归降魏国，魏国就封你为侯驻守丰邑。如果不归降，我就要屠戮丰邑。”
Chou Shih sent an envoy to Yung Ch'ih, who was guarding Feng, saying, "Feng was originally a colony of Liang, which was part of Wei. Now we have captured more than ten cities of Wei. If you will submit to Wei, Wei will make you a marquis. But if you persist in holding Feng and refuse to surrender, we will massacre the inhabitants."

雍齿雅不欲属沛公，及魏招之，即反为魏守丰。
雍齿本来就不愿意归属于沛公，等到魏国来招降了，立刻就反叛了沛公，为魏国守卫丰邑。
Yung Ch'ih had originally had no desire to ally himself with the governor of Pei and, when he was thus invited by Wei, he revolted and held the city of Feng in Wei's name.

沛公引兵攻丰，不能取。
沛公带兵攻打丰邑，没有攻下。
The governor of Pei led his troops in an attack on Feng, but was unable to take it.

沛公病，还之沛。
沛公生病了，退兵回到沛县。
Falling ill, he returned to Pei.

沛公怨雍齿与丰子弟叛之，闻东阳宁君、秦嘉立景驹为假王，在留，乃往从之，欲请兵以攻丰。
沛公怨恨雍齿和丰邑的子弟背叛他，又听说东阳县的宁君、秦嘉立景驹做了代理王，驻守在留县，于是前去投奔他，想向他借兵去攻打丰邑。
The governor of Pei was bitter because Yung Ch'ih and the men of Feng had turned against him. When he heard that Lord Ning of Tung-yang and Chin Chia had set up Ching Chu as acting king of Ch'u in Liu, he made his way there and joined them, requesting that they give him soldiers to attack Feng.

是时秦将章邯从陈，别将司马将兵北定楚地，屠相，至砀。
这时候秦朝将领章邯正在追击陈胜的军队，章邯的别将司马带兵向北平定楚地，屠戮了相县，到了砀县。
At this time the Chin general Chang Han, pursuing Ch'en She's special general Ssu-ma Jen, led his troops north to pacify the region of Ch'u, massacring the inhabitants of Hsiang and marching as far as Tang.

东阳宁君、沛公引兵西，与战萧西，不利。
东阳宁君、沛公领兵向西，和司马在萧县西交战，战势不利。
Lord Ning of Tung-yang and the governor of Pei led their troops west and fought with him west of Hsiao, but they could win no advantage.

还收兵聚留，引兵攻砀，三日乃取砀。
就退回来收集兵卒聚集在留县，然后带兵攻打砀县，攻了三天就攻下来了。
Returning, they gathered together their troops in Liu and led them in an attack on Tang. After three days they seized Tang.

因收砀兵，得五六千人。
于是收集砀县的兵卒，共得到五六千人。
and, adding to their forces some five or six thousand men captured at Tang.

攻下邑，拔之。
攻打下邑，攻了下来。
attacked and overcame Hsia-i.

还军丰。
退兵驻扎在丰邑。
Then they returned and camped near Feng.

闻项梁在薛，从骑百余往见之。
听说项梁在薛县，就带着一百多随从骑兵前去见项梁。
Hearing that Hsiang Liang was in Hsieh, the governor of Pei, accompanied by some hundred horsemen, went to see him.

项梁益沛公卒五千人，五大夫将十人。
项梁又给沛公增加了五千人，五大夫级的将领十人。
Hsiao Liang gave him five thousand foot soldiers and ten generals of the rank of fifth lord.

沛公还，引兵攻丰。
沛公回来后，又带兵去攻打丰邑。
The governor of Pei then returned and led his troops in an attack on Feng.

从项梁月余，项羽已拔襄城还。
沛公跟从项梁一个多月，项羽已经攻下襄城回来了。
A month or so after the governor of P'ei had allied himself with Hsiang Liang, Hsiang Yu captured the city of Hsiangch'eng and returned.

项梁尽召别将居薛。
项梁把各路将领全部召到薛县。
Hsiang Liang then summoned all his various generals to come to Hsieh.

闻陈王定死，因立楚后怀王孙心为楚王，治盱台。
听说陈王确实是死了，因而立楚国后代怀王的孙子熊心为楚王，建都盱台。
Here, having received positive news that Ch'en She was dead, he set up Hsin, grandson of the former King Huai of Ch'u as king of Ch'u, with his capital at Hsui.

项梁号武信君。
项梁号称武信君。
Hsiang Liang himself took the title of lord of Wu-hsin.

居数月，北攻亢父，救东阿，破秦军。
呆了几个月，向北攻打亢父，援救东阿，击败了秦军。
After several months he marched north to attack K'ang-fu, rescued the city of Tung-a, and defeated the Chin army.

齐军归，楚独追北，使沛公、项羽别攻城阳，屠之。
齐国军队回去了，只剩下楚军单独追击败逃之敌。另外让沛公、项羽去攻打城阳，屠戮了城阳。
Then, while Chi led its troops back to its own territory, Hsiang Liang alone pursued the defeated Chin army north, dispatching the governor of P'ei and Hsiang Yu with a special force to attack Ch'eng-yang. After massacring the inhabitants of Ch'eng-yang.

军濮阳之东，与秦军战，破之。
军队驻扎在濮阳县东边和秦军交战，打败了秦军。
they camped east of P'u-yang, where they fought with the Chin forces and defeated them.

秦军复振，守濮阳，环水。
秦军重新振作，守住濮阳，在城周围引水坚守。
The Chin army, recovering from this blow, defended its position at P'u-yang by encircling it with water.

楚军去而攻定陶，定陶未下。
楚军撤兵去攻打定陶，没有攻下。
The Ch'u army then withdrew and attacked Ting-tao, but was unable to conquer it.

沛公与项羽西略地至雍丘之下，与秦军战，大破之，斩李由。
沛公和项羽向西夺取土地，到了雍丘城下，和秦军交战，大败秦军，斩杀李由。
The governor of P'ei and Hsiang Yu seized the area to the west. Arriving before the walls of Yung-chiu, they again engaged the Chin forces and gravely defeated them, cutting down the Ch'in general Li Yu.

还攻外黄，外黄未下。
又返回攻打外黄，没有攻下。
They returned and attacked Wai-huang, but were unable to conquer it.

项梁再破秦军，有骄色。
项梁两次打败秦军，露出骄傲的神色。
Hsiang Liang in the meantime had inflicted another defeat on Chin and began to grow proud and boastful.

宋义谏，不听。
宋义进谏，项梁不听。
Sung I cautioned him about this, but he would not listen.

秦益章邯兵，夜衔枚击项梁，大破之定陶，项梁死。
秦朝给章邯增派了军队，趁着黑夜袭击项梁军队。为了防止喧哗，让士兵口里都衔着一根横木棍，结果在定陶打败了项梁的军队，项梁战死。
Ch'in then sent reinforcements to aid Chang Han. To prevent them from talking or shouting during the surprise attack, putting gags in the mouths of his men, Chang Han made a night attack on Hsiang Liang and inflicted a crushing defeat. Hsiang Liang was killed in the battle.

沛公与项羽方攻陈留，闻项梁死，引兵与吕将军俱东。
这时，沛公和项羽正在攻打陈留，听说项梁已死，就带兵和吕将军一起向东进军。
The governor of P'ei and Hsiang Yu were at the time attacking Ch'en-liu but, hearing of Hsiang Liang's death, they joined forces with General Lü Ch'en and marched east.

吕臣军彭城东，项羽军彭城西，沛公军砀。
吕臣的军队驻扎在彭城的东面，项羽的军队驻扎在彭城的西面，沛公的军队驻扎在砀县。
Lü Ch'en camped east of Peng-ch'eng, Hsiang Yu to the west, and the governor of P'ei at Tang.

章邯已破项梁军，则以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河，北击赵，大破之。
章邯打败了项梁的军队之后，就以为楚地的军队不值得担忧，于是渡过黄河，向北进攻赵国，大败赵军。
Chang Han, having defeated Hsiang Liang, felt that he had nothing more to worry about from the soldiers of the region of Ch'u. Therefore he crossed the Yellow River and marched north to attack Chao, inflicting a severe defeat.

当是之时，赵歇为王，秦将王离围之钜鹿城，此所谓“河北之军”也。
正当这个时候，赵歇立为赵王，秦将王离在钜鹿城包围了赵歇的军队，这就是所谓的河北军。
At this time the Chin general Wang Li surrounded Chao Hsieh, the king of Chao, in the city of Chü-lu. This was the so-called Army North of the River.

秦二世三年，楚怀王见项梁军破，恐，徙盱台，都彭城，并吕臣、项羽军自将之。
秦二世三年，楚怀王看到项梁军已被打败，害怕了，就把都城从盱台迁到彭城，把吕臣、项羽的军队合在一起由他亲自率领。
In the third year of the Second Emperor, when King Huai of Ch'u saw that Hsiang Liang's army had been defeated, he grew fearful and moved his capital from Hsü to Peng-ch'eng, where he combined the armies of Lü Ch'en and Hsiang Yu, and himself took command of the troops.

以沛公为砀郡长，封为武安侯，将砀郡兵。
任命沛公为砀郡太守，封为武安侯，统率砀郡的部队。
He made the governor of P'ei head of Tang Province, enfeoffed him as marquis of Wu-an, and put him in command of the troops of Tang.

封项羽为长安侯，号为鲁公。
封项羽为长安侯，号称鲁公。
Hsiang Yu he enfeoffed as marquis of Ch'ang-an with the title of “Duke of Lu”.

吕臣为司徒，其父吕青为令尹。
吕臣担任司徒，他的父亲吕青担任令尹。
Lü Ch'en was appointed minister of instruction and his father, Lü Ching, was made prime minister.

赵数请救，怀王乃以宋义为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为末将，北救赵。
赵国几次请求援救，怀王就任命宋义为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为末将，向北进兵救赵。
Since Chao had several times sent pleas for aid, King Huai made Sung I supreme general, Hsiang Yu second general, and Fan Tseng third general, and sent them north to rescue Chao.

令沛公西略地入关。
命令沛公向西攻取土地，进军关中。
The governor of P'ei he ordered to seize the region to the west and enter the Pass.

与诸将约，先入定关中者王之。
和诸将相约，谁先进入函谷关平定关中，就让谁在关中做王。
making a promise with the various leaders that whoever should enter the Pass first and conquer the area within should become king of the region.

当是时，秦兵强，常乘胜逐北，诸将莫利先入关。
这时候，秦军强大，常常乘着胜利的威势追击败逃之敌，诸将中没有人认为先入关是有利的事。
At this time the Chin forces were still very strong and took advantage of their supremacy to pursue those they had defeated, so that none of the leaders of the rebellion was anxious to be the first to enter the Pass.

独项羽怨秦破项梁军，奋，愿与沛公西入关。
只有项羽恨秦军打败了项梁的军队，很激愤，愿意和沛公一起西进入关。
But Hsiang Yu, embittered over the defeat of Hsiang Liang's army by Chin, angrily demanded to be allowed to go west with the governor of P'ei and attempt to enter the Pass.

怀王诸老将皆曰：“项羽为人僄悍猾贼。项羽尝攻襄城，襄城无遣类，皆阬之，诸所过无不残灭。”
怀王手下的老将们都说：“项羽这个人敏捷勇猛，却又奸猾伤人。项羽曾经攻下襄城，那里的军民没有一个活下来，都被他活埋了。凡是他经过的地方，没有不被毁灭的。”
King Huai's elder generals all advised him, saying, "Hsiang Yu is by nature extremely impetuous and cruel. When he attacked and conquered the city of Hsiangch'eng, he butchered every one of the inhabitants without mercy. Wherever he has passed he has left behind him destruction and death."

且楚数进取，前陈王、项梁皆败。
再说，多次进攻，先前陈王、项梁都被打败了。
The armies of Ch'u have several times in the past advanced and won gains, but Ch'en She and Hsiang Liang were both in the end defeated.

不如更遣长者扶义而西，告谕秦父兄。
不如改派忠厚老实的人，实行仁义，率军西进，向秦地的父老兄弟讲明道理。
This time it would be better to send a man of true moral worth who, relying upon righteousness, will proceed west and make a proclamation to the elders of Chin.

秦父兄苦其主久矣，今诚得长者往，毋侵暴，宜可下。
秦地父老兄弟因为他们的君主暴虐而受苦已经很久了，现在如果真的能有位忠厚老实的人前去，不欺压百姓，才会使秦地降服。
The men of Chin have long suffered under their rulers. Now if we can send a truly worthy man who will not come to them with rapine and violence in his heart, we can surely persuade them to submit.

今项羽僄悍，今不可遣；独沛公素宽大长者，可遣。
项羽只是敏捷勇猛，不能派他去。现在只有沛公一向忠厚老实，可以派他去。
Hsiang Yu is far too impetuous to be sent. Only the governor of P'ei, who from the first has shown himself to be a man of tolerance and moral stature, is worthy to go.

卒不许项羽，而遣沛公西略地，收陈王、项梁散卒。
怀王最终没有答应项羽，而派了沛公率领大军向西去夺取土地，一路收集陈胜、项梁的散兵。
In the end King Huai refused to grant Hsiang Yu's request, but dispatched only the governor of P'ei who, gathering up the scattered remnants of Ch'en She's and Hsiang Liang's armies, marched out to seize the region to the west.

乃道砀至成阳，与杠里秦军夹壁，破秦二军。
沛公取道砀县到达成阳，与杠里的秦军对垒相持，结果击败了秦军的两支部队。
Proceeding to Ch'eng-yang and Chiang-li, he threw his weight against the Chin fortifications there and defeated both garrisons.

楚军出兵击王离，大破之。
楚军又出兵攻击王离，把王离打得大败。
In the meantime the Ch'u forces under Hsiang Yu had attacked the Chin general Wang Li at Chü-lu and severely defeated him.

沛公引兵西，遇彭越昌邑，因与俱攻秦军，战不利。
沛公率兵西进，在昌邑与彭越相遇。于是和他一起攻打秦军，战事不利。
The governor of P'ei led his forces west and joined P'eng Yueh at Ch'ang-i. Together they attacked the Ch'in forces but, failing to achieve a victory.

还至栗，遇刚武侯，夺其军，可四千余人，并之。
撤兵到栗县，正好遇到刚武侯，就把他的军队夺了过来，大约有四千人，并入了自己的军队。
retreated to Li. Here they met the marquis of Kang-wu, seized the troops under his command amounting to about four thousand men, and added them to their own forces.

与魏将皇欣、魏申徒武蒲之军并攻昌邑，昌邑未拔。
又与魏将皇欣、魏申徒武蒲的军队合力攻打昌邑，没有攻下。
Then, joining the armies of the Wei general Huang Hsin and the Wei minister of works Wu Pu, they attacked Ch'ang-i again but, being unable to capture it.

西过高阳。
继续西进，经过高阳。
proceeded west past Kao-yang.

郦食其为监门，曰：“诸将过此者多，吾视沛公大人长者。”
郦食其负责看管城门，他说：“各路经过此地的多了，我看只有沛公才是个德行高尚忠厚老实的人。”
Li I-chi, the village gatekeeper, remarked, "Many generals have passed through this region, but I can see that the governor of P'ei is the most magnanimous and worthy of them all."

乃求见说沛公。
于是前去求见，游说沛公。
Then he requested to be allowed to meet the governor of P'ei and speak with him.

沛公方踞床，使两女子洗足。
沛公当时正叉开两腿坐在床上，让两个女子给他洗脚。
At the time the governor was sitting sprawled upon a couch with two servant girls washing his feet.

郦生不拜，长揖，曰：“足下必欲诛无道秦，不宜踞见长者。”
郦食其见了并不叩拜，只是略微俯身作了个长揖，说：“如果您一定要诛灭没有德政的暴秦，就不应该坐着接见长者。”
When Master Li entered, he did not make the customary prostration but instead gave a very deep bow and said, "If you truly desire to punish the evil rulers of Chin, it is hardly proper to receive one who is your elder in this slovenly fashion!"

于是沛公起，摄衣谢之。
于是沛公站起身来，整理衣服，向他道歉。
With this the governor arose, straightened his clothes, and apologized.

延上坐。
把他请到上坐。
showing Master Li to a seat of honor.

食其说沛公袭陈留，得秦积粟。
郦食其劝说沛公袭击陈留，得到了秦军储存的粮食。
Master Li then explained to him how to assault Ch'en-liu and capture the stores of grain which Ch'in had there.

乃以郦食其为广野君，郦商为将，将陈留兵，与偕攻开封，开封未拔。
沛公就封郦食其为广野君，任命他的弟弟郦商为将军，统率陈留的军队，与沛公一起攻打开封，没有攻下。
The governor of P'ei gave Li I-chi the title of "Lord of Kuang-yeh" and made his brother Li Shang a general, putting him in command of the troops of Ch'en-liu. Together they attacked K'ai-feng but, failing to capture it.

西与秦将杨熊战白马，又战曲遇东，大破之。
继续向西，与秦将杨熊在白马打了一仗，又在曲遇东面打了一仗，大破秦军。
proceeded west and engaged the Chin general Yang Hsiung in battle at Po-ma and again east of Ch'ü-yü, severely defeating him.

杨熊走之荥阳，二世使使者斩以徇。
杨熊逃到荥阳去了，秦二世派使者将他斩首示众。
Yang Hsiung fled to Jung-yang where, in order to serve as a warning to the rest of the army, he was executed by an envoy sent from the Second Emperor.

南攻颍阳，屠之。
沛公又向南攻打颍阳，屠戮了颍阳。
The governor of P'ei attacked Ying-yang, massacring its defenders.

因张良遂略韩地轘辕。
通过张良的关系，占领了韩国的轘辕险道。
and then, relying upon the guidance of Chang Liang, proceeded to seize the area of Huan-yüan in the region of Han.

当是时，赵别将司马卬方欲渡河入关，沛公乃北攻平阴，绝河津。
这时候，赵国的别将司马卬正想渡过黄河，进入函谷关。沛公就向北进攻平阴，截断黄河渡口。
At this time, Ssu-ma Ang, a general dispatched by Chao, was about to cross the Yellow River in hopes of entering the Pass. In order to prevent him, the governor of P'ei marched north to attack Ping-yin and destroyed the fording place across the Yellow River.

南，战雒阳军，军不利，还至阳城，收军中马骑，与南阳守齮战犨东，破之。
又向南进军，与秦军在洛阳东面交战，战事不利，退回到阳城，聚集军中的骑兵，在南阳县东面和南阳太守吕齮交战，打败了秦军。
Then he continued south to battle with the Ch'in forces east of Lo-yang. Being unsuccessful here, he withdrew to Yang-ch'eng, gathered together all his horsemen, and attacked and defeated I, the governor of Nan-yang Province, east of Ch'ou.

略南阳郡，南阳守齮走，保城守宛。
攻取了南阳郡，南阳郡守吕齮逃跑了，退守宛城。
He seized the province of Nan-yang while the governor, I, fled to the city of Yuan for protection.

沛公引兵过而西。
沛公率兵绕过宛城西进。
The governor of P'ei was about to lead his troops on to the west.

张良谏曰：“沛公虽欲急入关，秦兵尚众，距险。今不下宛，宛从后击，强秦在前，此危道也。”
张良进谏说：“您虽然想赶快入关，但目前秦兵数量仍旧很多，又凭借险要地势进行抵抗。如果现在不攻下宛城，那么宛城的敌人从背后攻击，前面又有强大的秦军，这是一条危险的道路啊。”
But Chang Liang cautioned him, saying, "Although you wish to enter the Pass as soon as possible, there are a great many soldiers of Chin holding the strong points. Now if you march on without seizing the city of Yuan, Yuan will attack you from behind. With the power of Chin awaiting you ahead, your way will be fraught with danger!"

于是沛公乃夜引兵从他道还，更旗帜，黎明，围宛城三帀。
于是沛公连夜率兵从另一条道返回，更换旗帜，黎明时分，把宛城紧紧围住，围了好几圈。
Accordingly the governor of P'ei led his troops back by another road at night, changed his flags and pennants, and just before dawn encircled the city of Yuan with several bands of troops.

南阳守欲自刭。
南阳郡守想要自刎。
The governor of Nan-yang was about to cut his throat.

其舍人陈恢曰：“死未晚也。”
他的门客陈恢说：“现在自刎还太早。”
When one of his followers, Ch'en Hui, stopped him, saying, "There is still plenty of time to die."

乃逾城见沛公，曰：“臣闻足下约，先入咸阳者王之。今足下留守宛。宛，大郡之都也，连城数十，人民众，积蓄多，吏人自以为降必死，故皆坚守乘城。”
于是越过城墙去见沛公，说：“我听说您和诸侯约定，先攻入咸阳的就让他在那里做王。现在您停下来攻打宛城。宛城是个大郡的都城，相连的城池有几十座，人民众多，积蓄充足，官民都认为投降肯定要被杀死，所以都决心据城坚守。”
Then he climbed over the city wall and appeared before the governor of P'ei. "I have heard," he said, "that Your Lordship has made an agreement that whoever shall enter the capital city of Hsien-yang first will become its king. But now you have stayed your march in order to invest the city of Yuan. Yuan is the capital of a great province with twenty or thirty cities under its control. Its people are numerous and its stores of provisions plentiful. Our officers believe that if they surrender they will certainly be put to death and therefore they have all mounted the walls and are firmly guarding their city."

今足下近日止攻，士死伤者必多；引兵去宛，宛必随足下后：足下前则失咸阳之约，后又有强宛之患。
现在您整天停在这里攻城，士兵伤亡必定很多；如果率军离去，宛城军队一定在后面追出；这样，您向西前进就会错过先进咸阳在那里称王的约定，后面又有宛城强大军队袭击的后患。
Now if you wear out your days remaining here attacking the city, many of your men are bound to suffer injury and death, while if you lead your troops away from Yuan, Yuan will surely pursue you from behind. Should you choose the former course you will never reach Hsien-yang in time to take advantage of the agreement, while should you choose the latter you will be bedeviled by the power of Yuan.

为足下计，莫若约降，封其守，因使止守，引其甲卒与之西。
替您着想，倒不如约定条件投降，封赏南阳太守，让他留下来守住南阳，您率领宛城的士兵一起西进。
If I were to suggest a plan for you, I would say it is best to promise to enfeoff the governor if he surrenders. Then you may leave him behind to guard the city for you while you lead his troops with you to the west.

诸城未下者，闻声争开门而待，足下通行无所累。”
那些还没有降服的城邑，听到了这个消息，一定会争着打开城门等候您。您就可以通行无阻地西进，不必担心什么了。”
When the other cities that have not submitted hear of your action, they will hasten to open their gates and await your coming, so that your passage will be freed from all hindrance."

沛公曰：“善。”
沛公说：“好！”
The governor of P'ei approved this idea.

乃以宛守为殷侯，封陈恢千户。
于是封宛城郡守为殷侯，封给陈恢一千户。
Accordingly he made the governor of Yuan marquis of Yin and enfeoffed Ch'en Hui with a thousand households.

引兵西，无不下者。
于是沛公率兵继续西进，所经过的城邑没有不降服的。
Then he led his troops west, and all the cities without exception submitted to him.

至丹水，高武侯鳃、襄侯王陵降西陵。
到了丹水，高武侯戚鳃、襄阳侯王陵也在西陵归降了。
When he reached the Tan River, Sai, the marquis of Kao-wu, and Wang Ling, the marquis of Hsiang, surrendered the area of Hsi-ling to him.

还攻胡阳，遇番君别将梅鋗，与皆，降析、郦。
沛公又回转来攻打胡阳，遇到了鄱君的别将梅鋗，就跟他一起，降服了析县和郦县。
Then he turned back and attacked Hu-yang where he met Mei Hsuan, special general of Wu Jui, the lord of P'o, and together they conquered Hsi and Li.

遣魏人宁昌使秦，使者未来，是时章邯已以军降项羽于赵矣。
沛公派遣魏国人宁昌出使秦地，宁昌还没有回来。这时，秦将章邯已经在赵地率军投降项羽了。
The governor of P'ei dispatched Ning Ch'ang, a man of Wei, as his envoy to the court of Chin. But he had not yet returned when Chang Han surrendered his army to Hsiang Yu at Chao.

初，项羽与宋义北救赵，及项羽杀宋义，代为上将军，诸将黥布皆属，破秦将王离军，降章邯，诸侯皆附。
当初，项羽和宋义向北去救赵，等到项羽杀了宋义，代替他做了上将军，各路将领如黥布等都归属了项羽；打败了秦将王离的军队，降服了章邯，诸侯都归附了项羽。
Earlier, Hsiang Yu and Sung I had marched north to rescue Chao from the Chin attack. Later, when Hsiang Yu murdered Sung I and took his place as supreme general, Ching Pu and the other leaders joined with him. He then defeated the army of the Chin general Wang Li, received the surrender of Chang Han, and secured command over all the other leaders.

及赵高已杀二世，使人来，欲约分王关中，沛公以为诈，乃用张良计，使郦生、陆贾往说秦将，啖以利，因袭攻武关，破之。
赵高杀了秦二世之后，派人来求见，想和沛公定约在关中分地称王，沛公以为其中有诈，就用了张良的计策，派郦生、陆贾去游说秦将，并用财利进行引诱，乘此机会前去偷袭武关，攻了下来。
After Chao Kao had murdered the Second Emperor, he sent an envoy to the governor of P'ei with a promise to divide the area within the Pass and make the governor a king over part of it. Believing this to be a trick, however, the governor followed the strategy suggested by Chang Liang and sent Master Li and Lu Chia to bargain with the Chin generals and tempt them to treason with offers of profit, while he himself proceeded to attack the Wu Pass and capture it.

又与秦军战于蓝田南，益张疑兵旗帜，诸所过毋得掠卤，秦人憙，秦军解，因大破之。
又在蓝田南面与秦军交战。增设疑兵旗帜，命令全军，所过之处，不得掳掠，秦地的人都很高兴，秦军瓦解，因此大败秦军。
He also fought with the Ch'in armies at Lantian, disposing his soldiers and increasing the number of his flags and pennants in such a way as to make his forces appear greater than they actually were. Wherever he passed, he forbade his men to plunder or seize prisoners. The people of Chin were delighted at this mildness and the Chin armies grew unwary, so that they suffered great defeat.

又战其北，大破之。乘胜，遂破之。
接着在蓝田的北面与秦军交战，又大败秦军。于是乘胜勇战，终于彻底打败了秦军。
He also fought to the north of Lantian and inflicted a major defeat. Taking advantage of these victories, he was able at last to destroy the Ch'in armies.

汉元年十月，沛公兵遂先诸侯至霸上，秦王子婴素车白马，系颈以组，封皇帝玺符节，降轵道旁。
汉元年十月，沛公的军队在各路诸侯中最先到达霸上。秦王子婴驾着白车白马，用丝绳系着脖子，封好皇帝的御玺和符节，在轵道旁投降。
In the tenth month of the first year of Han, the governor of P'ei finally succeeded in reaching Ba-shang ahead of the other leaders. Tzu-ying, the king of Chin, came in a plain carriage drawn by a white horse, wearing a rope about his neck, and surrendered the imperial seals and credentials by the side of Chih Road.

诸将或言诛秦王。
将领们有的说应该杀掉秦王。
Some of the generals asked that the king of Chin be executed.

沛公曰：“始怀王遣我，固以能宽容；且人已服降，又杀之，不祥。”
沛公说：“当初怀王派我攻关中，就是认为我能宽厚容人；再说人家已经投降了，又杀掉人家，这么做不吉利。”
But the governor of P'ei replied, "The reason King Huai first sent me upon this mission was that he sincerely believed I was capable of showing tolerance and mercy. Now to kill a man who has already surrendered would only bring bad luck!"

乃以秦王属吏，遂西入咸阳。
于是把秦王交给主管官吏，就向西进入咸阳。
With this he turned the king of Chin over to the care of his officials. Then he proceeded west and entered Hsien-yang.

欲止宫休舍，樊哙、张良谏，乃封秦重宝财物府库，还军霸上。
沛公想留在秦宫中休息，樊哙、张良劝阻，这才下令把秦宫中的贵重宝器财物和库府都封好，然后退回来驻扎在霸上。
He hoped to stay and rest for a while in the palaces of Chin, but Fan K'uai and Chang Liang advised him against this. Therefore he sealed up the storehouses containing Chin's treasures and wealth and returned to camp at Ba-shang.

召诸县父老豪杰曰：“父老苦秦苛法久矣，诽谤者族，偶语者弃市。”
沛公召来各县的父老和有才德有名望的人，对他们说：“父老们苦于秦朝的苛虐法令已经很久了，批评朝政得失的要灭族，相聚谈话的要处以死刑。”
There he summoned all the distinguished and powerful men of the districts and addressed them, saying, "Gentlemen, for a long time you have suffered beneath the harsh laws of Chin. Those who criticized the government were wiped out along with their families; those who gathered to talk in private were executed in the public market."

吾与诸侯约，先入关者王之，吾当王关中。
我和诸侯们约定，谁首先进入关中就在这里做王，所以我应当当关中王。
I and the other nobles have made an agreement that he who first enters the Pass shall rule over the area within. Accordingly I am now king of this territory within the Pass.

与父老约，法三章耳：杀人者死，伤人及盗抵罪。
现在我和父老们约定，法律只有三条：杀人者处死刑，伤人者和抢劫者依法治罪。
I hereby promise you a code of laws consisting of three articles only: He who kills anyone shall suffer death; he who wounds another or steals shall be punished according to the gravity of the offense.

余悉除去秦法。
其余凡是秦朝的法律全部废除。
For the rest, I hereby abolish all the laws of Chin.

诸吏人皆案堵如故。
所有官吏和百姓都像往常一样，安居乐业。
Let the officials and people remain undisturbed as before.

凡吾所以来，为父老除害，非有所侵暴，无恐！
总之，我到这里来，就是要为父老们除害，不会对你们有任何侵害，请不要害怕！
I have come only to save you from further harm, not to exploit or tyrannize over you. Therefore do not be afraid!

且吾所以还军霸上，待诸侯至而定约束耳。”
再说，我所以把军队撤回霸上，是想等着各路诸侯到来，共同制定一个规约。”
The reason I have returned to Ba-shang is simply to wait for the other leaders so that when they arrive we may settle the agreement.

乃使人与秦吏行县乡邑，告谕之。
随即派人和秦朝的官吏一起到各县镇乡村去巡视，向民众讲明情况。
He sent men to go with the Ch'in officials and publish this proclamation in the district towns and villages.

秦人大喜，争持牛羊酒食献飨军士。
秦地的百姓都非常喜悦，争着送来牛羊酒食，慰劳士兵。
The people of Chin were overjoyed and hastened with cattle, sheep, wine, and food to present to the soldiers.

沛公不让不受，曰：“仓粟多，非乏不欲费人。”
沛公推让不肯接受，说：“仓库里的粮食不少，并不缺乏，不想让大家破费。”
But the governor of P'ei declined all such gifts, saying, "There is plenty of grain in the granaries. I do not wish to be a burden to the people."

人又益喜，唯恐沛公不为秦王。
人们更加高兴，唯恐沛公不在关中做秦王。
With this the people were more joyful than ever and their only fear was that the governor of P'ei would not become king of Ch'in.

或说沛公曰：“秦富十倍天下，地形强。今闻章邯降项羽，项羽乃号为雍王，王关中。今则来，沛公恐不得有此。”
有人游说沛公说：“秦地的富足是其它地区的十倍，地理形势又好。现在听说章邯投降项羽，项羽给他的封号是雍王，在关中称王。如今要是他来了，沛公您恐怕就不能拥有这个地方了。”
Someone advised the governor of P'ei, saying, "The area of Chin is ten times richer than the rest of the empire and the land is protected by strong natural barriers. Now word has come that Chang Han has surrendered to Hsiang Yu and that Hsiang Yu therefore has granted him the title of king of Yung, intending to make him ruler of the area within the Pass. If he arrives, I fear that you will not be able to maintain your present claim."

可急使兵守函谷关，无内诸侯军，稍征关中兵以自益，距之。”
可以赶快派军队守住函谷关，不要让诸侯军进来。并且逐步征集关中的兵卒，加强自己的实力，以便抵抗他们。”
It would be best to send soldiers at once to guard the Han-ku Pass and prevent any of the armies of the other leaders from entering. In the meantime you can little by little gather up soldiers from the area within the Pass to reinforce your troops blocking the Pass."

沛公然其计，从之。
沛公认为他的话有道理，就依从了他的计策。
The governor of P'ei approved this plan and set about putting it into effect.

十一月中，项羽果率诸侯兵西，欲入关，关门闭。闻沛公已定关中，大怒，使黥布等攻破函谷关。
十一月中旬，项羽果然率领诸侯军西进，想要进入函谷关。可是关门闭着。项羽听说沛公已经平定了关中，非常恼火，就派黥布等攻克了函谷关。
During the eleventh month Hsiang Yu led the troops of the various armies west, as the governor had expected, and attempted to enter the Pass. Finding the Pass blocked and hearing that the governor of P'ei had already conquered the land within the Pass, he was greatly enraged and sent Ch'ing Pu and others to attack and break through the Han-ku Pass.

十二月中，遂至戏。
十二月中旬，到达戏水。
In the twelfth month he finally reached Hsi.

沛公左司马曹无伤闻项王怒，欲攻沛公，使人言项羽曰：“沛公欲王关中，令子婴为相，珍宝尽有之。”
沛公的左司马曹无伤听说项羽发怒，想要攻打沛公，就派人去对项羽说：“沛公要在关中称王，让秦王子婴做丞相，把秦宫所有的珍宝都据为己有。”
Ts'ao Wu-shang, marshal of the left to the governor of P'ei, hearing that Hsiang Yu was angry and wished to attack the governor of P'ei, sent a messenger to speak to Hsiang Yu, saying, "The governor of P'ei hopes to become king of the area within the Pass, employing Tzu-ying as his prime minister and keeping possession of all the precious articles and treasures of the capital."

欲以求封。
曹无伤想借此求得项羽的封赏。
He thought that by reporting thus he would be rewarded by Hsiang Yu with a fief.

亚父劝项羽击沛公。方飨士，旦日合战。
亚父范增劝说项羽攻打沛公，项羽正在犒劳将士，准备次日和沛公会战。
Fan Tseng strongly urged Hsiang Yu to attack the governor of P'ei. Accordingly Hsiang Yu feasted his soldiers and prepared to join in battle the following day.

是时项羽兵四十万，号百万。沛公兵十万，号二十万，力不敌。
这时项羽的兵力有四十万，号称百万；沛公的兵力有十万，号称二十万，实力抵不过项羽。
At this time Hsiang Yu claimed to have a force of 1,000,000 men, though the actual number was 400,000, while the governor of P'ei claimed a force of 200,000, which was actually only 100,000. Thus they were no match for each other in strength.

会项伯欲活张良，夜往见良，因以文谕项羽，项羽乃止。
恰巧项伯要救张良，使他不至于与沛公一起送死，趁夜来沛公军营见张良，因而有机会让项伯向项羽说了一番道理，项羽这才作罢。
As it happened, Hsiang Po, hoping to save the life of his friend Chang Liang, had gone the night before to see Chang Liang and as a result was able to convince Hsiang Yu of the governor of P'ei's loyalty, so that Hsiang Yu abandoned his plan to attack.

沛公从百余骑，驱之鸿门，见谢项羽。
次日沛公带了百余名随从骑兵驱马来到鸿门见项羽，向他道歉。
The governor of P'ei, accompanied by some hundred horsemen, hastened to Hung-men where he met Hsiang Yu and apologized to him.

项羽曰：“此沛公左司马曹无伤言之。不然，籍何以生此！”
项羽说：“这是沛公左司马曹无伤说的，不然我怎么会这样呢？”
Hsiang Yu replied, "It is your own marshal of the left, Ts'ao Wu-shang, who informed against you. If it were not for him, how would I ever have doubted you?"

沛公以樊哙、张良故，得解归。
沛公因为是带着樊哙、张良去的，才得以脱身返回。
The governor of P'ei, through the efforts of Fan K'uai and Chang Liang, was at last able to escape and return to his own camp.

归，立诛曹无伤。
回到军营，立即杀了曹无伤。
Upon his return he immediately executed Ts'ao Wu-shang.

项羽遂西，屠烧咸阳秦宫室，所过无不残破。
项羽于是向西行进，一路屠杀，焚烧了咸阳城内的秦王朝宫室，所经过的地方，没有不遭毁灭的。
Hsiang Yu then proceeded west and massacred the inhabitants of Hsien-yang, burning the city and the palaces of Chin, and leaving destruction everywhere he passed.

秦人大失望，然恐，不敢不服耳。
秦地的人们对项羽非常失望，但又害怕，不敢不服从他。
The people of Chin were filled with despair, but they were so terrified they had no courage to resist.

项羽使人还报怀王。怀王曰：“如约。”
项羽派人回去向怀王报告并请示。怀王说：“按原来约定的办。”
Hsiang Yu sent a messenger to return and report to King Huai. "Let all be done according to the agreement," King Huai replied.

项羽怨怀王不肯令与沛公俱西入关，而北救赵，后天下约。
项羽怨恨怀王当初不肯让他和沛公一起西进入关，却派他到北边去救赵，结果没能率先入关，落在了别人之后。
Hsiang Yu was angry that the king had not allowed him to march west with the governor of Pei and enter the Pass, but instead had sent him north to rescue Chao, thus causing him to miss out on the agreement concerning the rulership of the area within the Pass.

乃曰：“怀王者，吾家项梁所立耳，非有功伐，何以得主约！本定天下，诸将及籍也。”
他说：“怀王，是我家叔父项梁拥立的，他没有什么功劳，凭什么能主持定约呢！平定天下的，本来就是各路将领和我项籍。”
"King Huai," he said, "was set up solely through the efforts of my uncle Hsiang Liang. He has won no merit of his own. Why should he be made arbiter of the agreement? It is the other generals and I who actually conquered the empire!"

乃详尊怀王为义帝，实不用其命。
于是假意推尊怀王为义帝，实际上并不听从他的命令。
Then he pretended to honor King Huai by giving him the title of "Righteous Emperor," but in fact paid no attention to his commands.

正月，项羽自立为西楚霸王，王梁、楚地九郡，都彭城。
正月，项羽自立为西楚霸王，统治梁地、楚地的九个郡，建都彭城。
In the first month Hsiang Yu set himself up as "Dictator King of Western Ch'u," ruling nine provinces of Liang and Ch'u, with his capital at P'eng-ch'eng.

负约，更立沛公为汉王，王巴、蜀、汉中，都南郑。
又违背当初的约定，改立沛公为汉王，统治巴蜀、汉中之地，建都南郑。
In violation of the former agreement he made the governor of Pei King of Han instead of Chin, giving him the lands of Pa, Shu, and Han to rule, with his capital at Nan-cheng.

三分关中，立秦三将：章邯为雍王，都废丘；司马欣为塞王，都栎阳；董翳为翟王，都高奴。
把关中分为三份，封给秦朝的三个降将：章邯为雍王，建都废丘；司马欣为塞王，建都栎阳；董翳为翟王，建都高奴。
The area within the Pass he divided into three parts, setting up three former generals of Chin: Chang Han as King of Yung with his capital at Fei-chiu, Ssu-ma Hsin as King of Sai with his capital at Yueh-yang, and Tung I as King of Ti with his capital at Kao-nu.

楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，都洛阳。
又封楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，建都洛阳。
The Ch'u general Shen Yang of Hsia-ch'iu was made King of Ho-nan with his capital at Loyang.

赵将司马卬为殷王，都朝歌。
封赵将司马卬为殷王，建都朝歌。
While the Chao general Ssu-ma Ang was made King of Yin, his capital at Chao-ko.

赵王歇徙王代。
把赵王歇改封到代地为代王。
Hsieh, the King of Chao, was transferred to the position of King of Tai.

赵相张耳为常山王，都襄国。
封赵相张耳为常山王，建都襄国。
While his prime minister Chang Erh was made King of Ch'ang-shan with his capital at Hsiang-kuo.

当阳君黥布为九江王，都六。
封当阳君黥布为九江王，建都六县。
The Lord of T'ang-yang, Ch'ing Pu, was made King of Chiu-chiang, his capital at Liu.

怀王柱国共敖为临江王，都江陵。
封怀王的柱国共敖为临江王，建都江陵。
Kung Ao, chief minister to King Huai, was made King of Lin-chiang, his capital at Chang-ling.

番君吴芮为衡山王，都邾。
封番君吴芮为衡山王，建都邾县。
The Lord of Fan, Wu Jui, became King of Heng-shan, his capital at Chu.

燕将臧荼为燕王，都蓟。
封燕将臧荼为燕王，建都蓟县。
The Yen general Tsang Tu was made King of Yen, his capital at Chi.

故燕王韩广徙王辽东。
把原燕王韩广改封到辽东为辽东王。
After the former King of Yen, Han Kuang, had been ordered to remove to the position of King of Liao-tung.

广不听，臧荼攻杀之无终。
韩广不听，臧荼就率军去攻打，在无终把他杀了。
When Han Kuang refused to obey, Tsang Tu attacked and killed him at Wu-chung.

封成安君陈馀河间三县，居南皮。
项羽又封给成安君陈馀河间周围的三个县，让他住在南皮县。
Ch'en Yü, the Lord of Ch'eng-an, was enfeoffed with three districts in Ho-chien, with his residence at Nan-p'i.

封梅鋗十万户。
封给梅鋗十万户。
While Mei Hsüan was enfeoffed with a hundred thousand households.

四月，兵罢戏下，诸侯各就国。
四月，各路诸侯在项羽的大将军旗帜下罢兵，回各自的封国去。
In the fourth month the various armies left the command of Hsiang Yu and proceeded with the feudal leaders to their respective territories.

汉王之国，项王使卒三万人从，楚与诸侯之慕从者数万人。
汉王也前往封国，项羽派了三万士兵随从前往，楚国和诸侯国中因为敬慕而跟随汉王的有几万人。
When the King of Han departed for his kingdom, Hsiang Yu allowed him to take along thirty thousand soldiers. Gathering a force of tens of thousands of the soldiers of Ch'u and the other feudal leaders who admired and followed him.

从杜南入蚀中。
他们从杜县往南进入蚀地的山谷中。
He accordingly proceeded from Tu-nan and entered the Shih Gorge.

去辄烧绝栈道，以备诸侯盗兵袭之，亦示项羽无东意。
军队过去以后，在陡壁上架起的栈道就全部烧掉，为的是防备诸侯或其他强盗偷袭，也是向项羽表示没有东进之意。
As he proceeded, he burned and destroyed the plank roads behind him in order to prevent bandit troops of the other feudal lords from attacking him and, at the same time, to demonstrate to Hsiang Yu that he had no intention of marching east again.

至南郑，诸将及士卒多道亡归，士卒皆歌思东归。
到达南郑时，部将和士兵有许多人在中途逃跑回去了，士兵们都唱着歌，想东归回乡。
When he reached Nan-cheng, he found that many of his officers and men had deserted along the way and returned home, while those who were left all sang the songs of their homeland and longed to go back east.

韩信说汉王曰：“项羽王诸将之有功者，而王独居南郑。是迁也。军吏士卒皆山东之人也，日夜跂而望归，及其锋而用之，可以有大功。天下已定，人皆自宁，不可复用。不如决策东乡，争权天下。”
韩信劝说汉王道：“项羽封有功的部将，却偏偏让您到南郑去，分明是流放您。部队中的军官、士兵大都是崤山以东的人，他们日夜踮起脚跟东望，盼着回归故乡。如果趁着这种心气极高的时候利用他们，可以建大功。如果等到天下平定以后人们都安居乐业了，就再也用不上他们了。不如立即决策，率兵东进，与诸侯争权夺天下。”
Han Hsin advised the King of Han, saying, "Hsiang Yu has made kings of all his generals who achieved merit, but you alone he has sent to live in Nan-cheng as though you were being exiled for some crime. The officers and soldiers of your army are all men of the east, and day and night they gaze into the distance longing to return home. If you take up your arms now and use this momentum, you can win great glory. But if you wait until the world is settled and all men are at peace, then you cannot hope to rally them again. You had best lay plans to return east and fight for mastery of the world!"

项羽出关，使人徙义帝。
项羽出了函谷关，派人让义帝迁都。
When Hsiang Yu returned east through the Pass, he sent a messenger to transfer the residence of the Righteous Emperor.

曰：“古之帝者地方千里，必居上游。”
并对义帝说：“古代帝王拥有纵横各千里的土地，而且一定要居住在江河的上游。”
announcing that "the emperors of ancient times who ruled an area a thousand miles on each side invariably resided on the upper reaches of a river."

乃使使徒义帝长沙郴县，趣义帝行。
派使者把义帝迁徙到长沙郡的郴县，催促他赶快起程。
The envoy accordingly moved the Righteous Emperor to the district of Ch'en in Ch'ang-sha, pressing him to hurry on his way.

群臣稍倍叛之，乃阴令衡山王、临江王击之，杀义帝江南。
群臣于是渐渐背叛了他，项羽就秘密命令衡山王、临江王去杀义帝，把义帝杀死在江南。
With this, the emperor's ministers became increasingly disillusioned and turned their backs upon him. Hsiang Yu then secretly ordered the kings of Heng-shan and Lin-chiang to attack and murder the Righteous Emperor at Chiang-nan.

项羽怨田荣，立齐将田都为齐王。
项羽怨恨田荣，就封齐将田都为齐王。
Hsiang Yu, being angry with Tien Jung, set up Tien Tu, a general of Chi, as king of Chi.

田荣怒，因自立为齐王，杀田都而反楚；予彭越将军印，令反梁地。
田荣很生气，就自立为齐王，杀掉田都，反叛楚王；又把将军印授给了彭越，让他在梁地反楚。
But Tien Jung, enraged at this, declared himself king of Chi, murdered Tien Tu, and revolted against Ch'u. Then he presented P'eng Yueh with the seals of office of a general and sent him to lead a revolt in the region of Liang.

楚令萧公角击彭越，彭越大破之。
楚派萧公角去攻打彭越，被彭越打得大败。
Ch'u ordered Chueh, lord of Hsiao, to attack P'eng Yueh, but P'eng Yueh inflicted a severe defeat on him.

陈馀怨项羽之弗王己也，令夏说说田荣，请丘击张耳。
陈余怨恨项羽不封自己为王，就派夏说去游说田荣，向他借兵攻打张耳。
Ch'en Yu, angry that Hsiang Yu had not made him a king, dispatched Hsia Yueh to plead with Tien Jung and persuade him to send troops to attack Chang Erh, the king of Ch'ang-shan.

齐予陈馀兵，击破常山王张耳，张耳亡归汉。
齐国给了陈余一些兵力，打败了常山王张耳，张耳逃走归附了汉王。
Chi in response sent a body of soldiers to aid Ch'en Yu in attacking Chang Erh. Chang Erh fled from his territory and went to join the king of Han.

迎赵王歇于代，复立为赵王，赵王因立陈馀为代王。
陈余从代地把赵王歇接回赵国，重新立为赵王。赵王因此立陈余为代王。
Ch'en Yu then proceeded to Tai to fetch Hsieh, the former king of Chao, and restore him to his throne in Chao. In return, the king of Chao set up Ch'en Yu as king of Tai.

项羽大怒，北击齐。
项羽大为恼怒，发兵向北攻打齐国。
Hsiang Yu, greatly enraged at these moves, marched north to attack Ch'i.

八月，汉王用韩信之计，从故道还，袭雍王章邯。
八月，汉王采用韩信的计策，顺原路返回关中，袭击雍王章邯。
In the eighth month, the king of Han, having decided to follow the plan outlined by Han Hsin, marched back by the Old Road and returned east to attack Chang Han, the king of Yung.

邯迎击汉陈仓，雍兵败，还走；止战好畤，又复败，走废丘。
章邯在陈仓迎击汉军，雍王的军队被打败，退兵逃走；在好畤停下来再战，又被打败，逃到废丘。
Chang Han proceeded west to meet the attack, clashing with the Han forces at Ch'en-tsang. The soldiers of Yung were defeated and fled back east but halted to fight at Hao-chih. Defeated again, they fled to Fei-chiu.

汉王遂定雍地，东至咸阳，引兵围雍王废丘，而遣诸将略定陇西、北地、上郡。
汉王于是平定了雍地。汉王向东挺进咸阳，率军在废丘包围雍王，并派遣将领们去夺取土地，平定了陇西、北地、上郡。
Thus the king of Han was able eventually to win control of the region of Yung and proceed east to Hsien-yang. He led his troops and surrounded the king of Yung at Fei-chiu, at the same time dispatching his generals to seize control of the provinces of Lung-hsi, Pei-ti, and Shang.

令将军薛欧、王吸出武关，因王陵兵南阳，以迎太公、吕后于沛。
派将军薛欧、王吸带兵出武关，借着王陵兵驻南阳，到沛县去接太公、吕后。
He also ordered his generals Hsieh Ou and Wang Hsi to proceed by the Wu Pass, join the forces of Wang Ling at Nan-yang, and go to fetch his father and mother from P'ei.

楚闻之，发兵距之阳夏，不得前，令故吴令郑昌为韩王，距汉兵。
楚王听说后，派兵在阳夏阻截，汉军不能前进。楚又封原吴县县令郑昌为韩王，以抵拒汉军。
When Hsiang Yu heard of this, he dispatched troops to block their march at Yang-hsia and prevent them from advancing. At the same time, he made the former district magistrate of Wu, Cheng Ch'ang, king of Han so that he could aid in blocking the Han forces.

二年，汉王东略地，塞王欣、翟王翳、河南王申阳皆降。
二年，汉王向东夺取土地，塞王司马欣、翟王董翳、河南王申阳都归降了汉王。
In the second year, the king of Han proceeded east, seizing control of the land. Ssu-ma Hsin, the king of Sai; Tung I, the king of Ti; and Shen Yang, the king of Ho-nan, all surrendered to him.

韩王昌不听，使韩信击破之。
韩王昌不肯归降，汉王派韩信打败了他。
But Cheng Ch'ang, the king of Han, refused to submit. Therefore he dispatched Han Hsin to attack and defeat him.

于是置陇西、北地、上郡、渭南、河上、中地郡；关外置河南郡。
于是把攻占的土地设置为陇西、北地、上郡、渭南、河上、中地等郡；在关外设置了河南郡。
Out of the land he had conquered, he created the provinces of Lung-hsi, Pei-ti, Shang, Wei-nan, Ho-shang, and Chung-ti within the Pass and beyond the Pass the province of Ho-nan.

更立韩太尉信为韩王。
改封韩国的太尉信为韩王。
He made his grand commandant Han Hsin the new king of Han.

诸将以万人若以一郡降者，封万户。
汉王下令各路将领，率领一万人或者献出一郡之地降汉的，封给他一万户。
Among his generals, all those who had defeated a force of ten thousand men or captured a province were enfeoffed with ten thousand households.

缮治河上塞。
修筑河上郡的要塞。
He then ordered the border defenses north of the Yellow River to be repaired and manned.

诸故秦苑囿园池，皆令人得田之。
原先秦朝供帝王游玩打猎的园林，都允许人们去耕种。
And turned over all of Chin's former royal hunting parks, gardens, and lakes to the people to be converted into fields for farming.

正月，虏雍王弟章平，大赦罪人。
正月，俘虏了雍王的弟弟章平。大赦天下罪犯。
In the first month, he took Chang Ping, the younger brother of the king of Yung, prisoner. A general amnesty was declared, freeing criminals.

汉王之出关至陕，抚关外父老，还，张耳来见，汉王厚遇之。
汉王出了武关到达陕县，抚慰关外的父老，回来后，张耳前来求见。汉王对他十分厚待。
The king of Han journeyed beyond the Pass as far as Hsia, looking after the wants of the people beyond the Pass. On his return, Chang Erh came to see him and the king of Han received him with kindness and generosity.

二月，令除秦社稷，更立汉社稷。
二月，下令废除秦的社稷，改立汉的社稷。
In the second month, the king of Han gave orders for Chin's altars of the soil and grain to be abolished, and the altars of Han set up in their place.

三月，汉王从临晋渡，魏王豹将兵从。
三月，汉王从临晋渡黄河，魏王豹带兵跟随着。
In the third month, the king of Han proceeded through Lin-chin and crossed the Yellow River, where Pao, the king of Wei, led his troops to join him.

下河内，虏殷王，置河内郡。
攻下河内，俘虏了殷王，设置了河内郡。
He conquered Ho-nei and took Ssu-ma Ang, the king of Yin, prisoner, making his territory into the province of Ho-nei.

南渡平阴津，至雒阳。
又率军向南渡过平阴津，到达洛阳。
Proceeding south, he crossed the Yellow River at the Pingyin Ford and reached Lo-yang.

新城三老董公遮说汉王以义帝死故。
新城县一位掌管教化的三老董公拦住了汉王，向他说了义帝被杀的情况。
Here Lord Tung, the elder of Hsin-ch'eng, intercepted him and informed him of the death of the Righteous Emperor.

汉王闻之，袒而大哭。
汉王听后，袒露左臂失声大哭。
When he heard this, the king of Han bared his arms and lamented loudly.

遂为义帝发丧，临三日。
随即下令为义帝发丧，哭吊三天。
He then proclaimed a period of mourning for the sake of the emperor, with three days of lamentation.

发使者告诸侯曰：“天下共立义帝，北面事之。今项羽放杀义帝于江南，大逆无道。”
派使者通告各诸侯说：“天下诸侯共同拥立义帝，称臣事奉。如今项羽在江南放逐并杀害了义帝，这是大逆不道。”
And dispatched envoys to report to the other nobles, saying, "The people of the world have joined together in setting up the Righteous Emperor and serving him as their sovereign. But now Hsiang Yu has banished him from his throne and murdered him at Chiang-nan. This is a most treasonable and heinous offense!"

寡人亲为发丧，诸侯皆缟素。
我亲自为义帝发丧，诸侯也都应该穿白戴素。
I myself have proclaimed mourning on his behalf, and I trust the other lords will join me in donning the plain white garments of sorrow.

悉发关内兵，收三河士，南浮江汉以下，愿从诸侯王击楚之杀义帝者。”
我将发动关中全部军队，聚集河南、河东、河内三郡的士兵，向南沿长江、汉水而下，我希望与诸侯王一起去打楚国那个杀害义帝的罪人！”
Then I shall lead forth all the troops of the area within the Pass, gather together the forces of the three lands along the river, and in the south descend by the Han and Yangtze rivers, begging to join with the other lords and kings in attacking him of Ch'u who is the murderer of the Righteous Emperor!"

是时项王北击齐，田荣与战城阳。
这时候，项羽正在北方攻打齐国，田荣和他在城阳交战。
At this time, Hsiang Yu had marched north to attack Chi, fighting with Tien Jung at Ch'eng-yang.

田荣败，走平原，平原民杀之。
田荣被打败，逃往平原，平原的民众杀了他。
Tien Jung was defeated and fled to Ping-yuan, where the people of Ping-yuan killed him.

齐皆降楚，楚因焚烧其城郭，系虏其子女。
齐国各地也都归降楚国。楚军放火焚毁了齐国的城邑，掠走了齐人的子女。
And with this, all of Chi surrendered to the forces of Ch'u. But Hsiang Yu burned its cities and fortifications and enslaved its women and children.

齐人叛之。
齐国人十分愤怒，又反叛楚国了。
Until the men of Chi once more rose up in revolt.

田荣弟横立荣子广为齐王，齐王反楚城阳。
田荣的弟弟田横立田荣的儿子田广为齐王。齐王已在城阳举兵反楚。
Tien Jung's younger brother, Tien Heng, set up Tien Jung's son Kuang as king of Chi, holding the area of Ch'eng-yang in revolt against Ch'u.

项羽虽闻汉东，既已连齐兵，欲遂破之而击汉。
项羽虽然听说了汉王已经到东方来了，但因为已经与齐军连续作战多日，就想在打败齐军之后再去迎击汉军。
Although Hsiang Yu had received word of the king of Han's march to the east, he was already engaged in a struggle with the forces of Chi and hoped to accomplish their defeat before proceeding to attack Han.

汉王以故得劫五诸侯兵，遂入彭城。
汉王因此得以挟持五诸侯的军队，攻入彭城。
For this reason, the king of Han was able to commandeer the troops of five of the feudal lords and eventually enter the city of P'eng-ch'eng.

项羽闻之，乃引兵去齐，从鲁出胡陵，至萧，与汉大战彭城灵壁东睢水上，大破汉军，多杀士卒，睢水为之不流。
项羽闻讯，立即率兵离开齐国，从鲁县穿过胡陵到达萧县，跟汉军在彭城灵壁以东的睢水上激战，大败汉军，杀了许多汉兵，睢水因此被阻塞不能畅流。
When Hsiang Yu received news of this, he led his forces back from Chi, marching from Lu through Hu-ling as far as Hsiao, where he engaged the king of Han in a great battle at P'eng-ch'eng and east of Ling-pi on the Sui River, inflicting a severe defeat. So many of the Han officers and men were killed that the Sui River was blocked and ceased to flow.

乃取汉王父母妻子于沛。置之军中以为质。
项羽又派人从沛县掳来了汉王的父母、妻子、儿女，把他们扣留在军中做人质。
Then Hsiang Yu seized the parents, wife, and children of the king of Han at P'ei and placed them under guard in the midst of his army as hostages.

当是时，诸侯见楚强汉败，还皆去汉复为楚。
当时，诸侯们见楚军强大，汉军被打败，又都背离了汉王而去帮助楚王。
At this time, when the other nobles saw that the Ch'u forces were very strong and the Han forces were retreating in defeat, they all deserted Han and went over again to the side of Ch'u.

塞王欣亡入楚。
塞王司马欣逃入楚国。
Ssu-ma Hsin, the king of Sai, fled to Ch'u.

吕后兄周吕侯为汉将兵，居下巴。
吕后的哥哥周吕侯为汉王率兵驻扎在下邑。
The older brother of the king of Han's wife, Lu Tse, the marquis of Chou-li, commanded a force of Han soldiers at Hsia-i.

汉王从之，稍收士卒，军砀。
汉王去投奔他，逐渐聚集士卒，驻扎在砀县。
And the king of Han, joining him, gradually managed to gather together his soldiers and form an army at Tang.

汉王乃西过梁地，至虞。
然后率军向西，经过梁地，到达虞县。
He then marched west through the territory of Liang as far as Yu.

使谒者随何之九江王布所，曰：“公能令布举兵叛楚，项羽必留击之。得留数月，吾取天下必矣。”
汉王派使者随何到九江王黥布那里去，说：“您如果能说服黥布发兵反楚，项羽一定会暂停留在那里攻击黥布。只要项羽军停留几个月，我就一定能取得天下。”
There he dispatched Sui Ho, his master of guests, as an envoy to go to the residence of Ching Pu, the king of Chiu-chiang, telling him, "If you can persuade Ching Pu to raise an army and revolt against Ch'u, Hsiang Yu will be bound to halt his advance and attack him. If I can get Hsiang Yu to delay for a few months, I will surely be able to seize control of the empire!"

随何往说九江王布，布果背楚。
随何前去游说九江王黥布。黥布果然反楚。
Sui Ho went and pleaded with Ching Pu, who as a result revolted against Ch'u.

楚使龙且往击之。
楚派龙且前去攻打他。
With this, Hsiang Yu dispatched Lung Chu to go and attack him.

汉王之败彭成而西，行使人求家室，家室亦亡，不相得。
汉王在彭城兵败向西撤退的时候，途中派人去寻找家室，家室都已逃走，没有找到他们。
When the king of Han was marching west after his defeat at P'eng-ch'eng, he sent someone to look for the members of his family, but they had in the meantime all fled and he could not find them.

败后乃独得孝惠，六月，立为太子，大赦罪人。
败退途中只找到了孝惠。六月，立孝惠为太子，大赦罪犯。
After his defeat, he was able to locate only his son (later Emperor Hui). In the sixth month, he set up his son as heir apparent, proclaiming a general amnesty.

令太子守栎阳，诸侯子在关中者皆集栎阳为卫。
让太子守卫栎阳，把在关中的各诸侯的儿子也都集中到栎阳来守卫。
And left him to guard the city of Yueh-yang. All the relatives of the feudal lords in the area within the Pass gathered in Yueh-yang to act as the heir apparent's bodyguards.

引水灌废丘，废丘降，章邯自杀。
接着，引水灌废丘，废丘降汉，章邯自杀。
Then the king of Han dug canals and flooded the city of Fei-ch'iu. Fei-ch'iu surrendered and its king, Chang Han, committed suicide.

更名废丘为槐里。
把废丘改名为槐里。
The king of Han changed the name of the city to Huai-li.

于是令祠官祀天地、四方、上帝山川，以时祀之。
于是命令掌管祭祀的祠官祭祀天地、四方、上帝、山川，要按时祭祀。
At this time, he ordered the officials in charge of religious ceremonies to perform sacrifices to heaven and earth, the four directions, the Lord on High, and the various mountains and rivers, all to be celebrated at the due seasons.

兴关内卒乘塞。
又发动关内的士兵去防守边塞。
He raised a force of soldiers from the area within the Pass to man the various fortifications.

是时九江王布与龙且战，不胜，与随何间行归汉。
这时候，九江王黥布与龙且交战，没打胜，就跟随何一起抄小路而行来归附汉王。
At this time, Ching Pu, the king of Chiu-chiang, was fighting with Lung Chu but, failing to gain a victory, he proceeded with Sui Ho by a secret route and joined the forces of Han.

汉王稍收士卒，与诸将及关中卒益出，是以兵大振荥阳，破楚京、索间。
汉王又渐渐收集士兵，跟各路将领及关中军队频频出动，因而军威大振于荥阳，在京、索之间击败了楚军。
The king of Han gradually recruited more soldiers and, with the other generals and the troops from within the Pass, little by little advanced. Thus he was able to muster a great force at Jung-yang and defeat the Ch'u army in the area of Ching and So.

三年，魏王豹谒归视亲疾，至，即绝河津，反为楚。
三年，魏王豹请假回乡去探视父母的疾病，一到魏国，就毁绝了黄河的渡口，反汉助楚。
In the third year, Wei Pao, the king of Wei, begged leave to return to his home and look after his ailing parents but, when he had reached his destination, he cut off the ford across the Yellow River, revolted against Han, and declared himself in alliance with Ch'u.

汉王使郦生说豹，豹不听，汉王遣将军韩信击，大破之，虏豹。
汉王派郦食其去劝说魏豹，魏豹不听。汉王就派将军韩信前去攻打，把魏军打得大败，俘虏了魏豹。
The king of Han sent Master Li I-chi to persuade him to reconsider, but Wei Pao refused to listen. The king then dispatched his general Han Hsin, who inflicted a decisive defeat and took Wei Pao prisoner.

遂定魏地，置三郡，曰河东、太原、上党。
于是平定了魏地，设置了三个郡：河东郡、太原郡、上党郡。
Thus the king of Han managed to conquer the region of Wei, which he made into three provinces: Ho-tung, T'ai-yuan, and Shang-tang.

汉王乃令张耳与韩信遂东下井陉击赵，斩陈馀、赵王歇。
汉王随即命令张耳与韩信率兵东下井陉，攻打赵国，杀了陈余和赵王歇。
He ordered Chang Erh and Han Hsin to proceed east down the Ching Gorge and attack Chao, where they executed Ch'en Yu and Hsieh, the king of Chao.

其明年，立张耳为赵王。
第二年，封张耳为赵王。
The following year, Chang Erh was made king of Chao.

汉王军荥阳南，筑甬道属之河，以取敖仓。
汉王的军队驻扎在荥阳南面，修筑了一条两旁筑墙的甬道，和黄河南岸相连接，以便取用敖仓的粮食。
The king of Han camped south of Jung-yang and constructed a walled supply road following along the banks of the Yellow River in order to transport grain from the Ao Granary.

与项羽相距岁余。
汉王跟项羽互相对峙，持续了一年多。
Here he and Hsiang Yu remained at an impasse for well over a year.

项羽数侵夺汉甬道，汉军乏食，遂围汉王。
项羽多次侵夺汉甬道，汉军粮食缺乏，项羽于是包围了汉王。
Hsiang Yu had several times attacked and cut off the Han supply road, and the Han army was growing very short of provisions. Finally, Hsiang Yu succeeded in surrounding the king of Han.

汉王请和，割荥阳以西者为汉，项王不听。
汉王请求讲和，条件是把荥阳以西的地方划归汉王。项王不答应。
Who made a bid for peace, suggesting that they divide the empire in two, he himself to retain all the land west of Jung-yang as part of Han. When Hsiang Yu refused to consent to this.

汉王患之，乃用陈平之计，予陈平金四万斤，以间疏楚君臣。
汉王为此而忧虑，就用陈平的计策，给了陈平黄金四万斤，用以离间项羽和范增君臣之间的关系。
The king of Han was much distressed but, following a plan suggested by Ch'en Ping, he gave Ch'en Ping a sum of forty thousand catties of gold to use as bribes in causing dissension between the leaders of Ch'u.

于是项羽乃疑亚父。
项羽便对亚父范增产生了怀疑。
As a result, Hsiang Yu began to doubt his aide, Fan Tseng.

亚父是时劝项羽遂下荥阳，及其见疑，乃怒，辞老，愿赐骸骨归卒伍。
范增当时是劝项羽务必攻下荥阳，当他遭到项羽猜疑后，非常愤怒，就托辞年老，希望项羽准许他乞身告退回乡为民。
Fan Tseng at the time was urging Hsiang Yu to carry through the assault on Jung-yang but, when he found that his loyalty was doubted, he grew angry and begged leave to retire, requesting that he be relieved of his duties and returned to the ranks of a common soldier.

未至彭城而死。
结果还没有到彭城就死了。
His request was granted and he departed, but died before he reached P'eng-ch'eng.

汉军绝食，乃夜出女子东门二千余人，被甲，楚因四面击之。
汉军粮草断绝，就趁夜把二千多名身披铠甲的女子放出东门，楚军从四面追赶围打。
The Han army had by this time run completely out of food. The king of Han dressed some two thousand women in armor and sent them out at night from the eastern gate of Jung-yang. When the Ch'u forces flocked from all directions to attack them.

将军纪信乃乘王驾，诈为汉王，诳楚，楚皆呼“万岁”，之城东观。
这时将军纪信乘坐着汉王的车驾，假扮成汉王的样子诳骗楚军。楚军一起高呼万岁，都到城东去观看。
the Han general Chi Hsin, in order to deceive Ch'u, rode forth in the royal chariot, pretending to be the king of Han. With shouts of victory, the men of Ch'u all rushed to the eastern side of the city walls to see him.

以故汉王得与数十骑出西门遁。
因此汉王才得以带着几十名随从骑兵从城西门出去逃走。
In this way the king of Han, accompanied by twenty or thirty horsemen, was able to slip out by the western gate and flee.

令御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公守荥阳。诸将卒不能从者，尽在城中。
出城之前汉王命令御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公守卫荥阳。那些不能随从汉王出城的将领和士兵，都留在城中。
He left the grand secretary Chou K'o, Wei Pao, the former king of Wei, and Lord Tsung to guard Jung-yang. The other generals and their men who had been unable to accompany the king all remained within the city.

周苛、枞公相谓曰：“反国之王，难与守城。”因杀魏豹。
周苛、枞公商量说：“魏豹是已经反叛过的侯国之王，难以和他一起守城。”于是把魏豹杀了。
Chou K'o and Lord Tsung, agreeing with each other that it would be difficult to guard the city with the king of a country that had once revolted, proceeded to murder Wei Pao.

汉王之出荥阳入关，收兵欲复东。
汉王逃出荥阳进入关中，收集士兵准备再次东进。
After the king of Han escaped from Jung-yang he retired within the Pass and gathered together more troops, hoping once more to march east.

袁生说汉王曰：“汉与楚相距荥阳数岁，汉常困。愿君王出武关，项羽必引兵南走，王深壁，令荥阳、城皋间且得休。使韩信等辑河北赵地，连燕、齐，君王乃复走荥阳，未晚也。如此，则楚所备者多，力分，汉得休，复与之战，破楚必矣。”
袁生游说汉王说：“汉与楚在荥阳相持不下好几年，汉军常陷于困窘的境地。希望汉王出武关，项羽一定率军南下，那时大王加高壁垒，不出战，让荥阳、成皋一带得以休息。派韩信等去安抚河北赵地，把燕国、齐国连结起来，那时大王再兵进荥阳也不晚。这样，楚军就要多方防备，力量分散，而汉军得到了休整，再跟楚军作战，打败楚军，就确定无疑了。”
Master Yuan advised the king, saying, "While Han and Ch'u remained in stalemate at Jung-yang for several years, our men were in constant difficulty. I beg you this time to go out by the Wu Pass. Hsiang Yu will surely hasten south with his troops to meet you, and you may then take refuge behind heavy fortifications. In this way you can relieve the pressure on the men at Jung-yang and Ch'eng-kao, in the meantime sending Han Hsin and others to gather forces in Hopei and the region of Chao and to form an alliance with Yen and Chi. Then, if you should again march upon Jung-yang, it would still not be too late. Thus Ch'u will be obliged to guard a number of points and its strength will be divided, while the Han forces, having had time to rest before engaging in battle again, will certainly defeat Ch'u."

汉王从其计，出军宛、叶间，与黥布行收兵。
汉王听从了他的计策，出兵于宛县、叶县之间，与黥布一路行进，一路收集人马。
The king of Han, adopting this plan, proceeded with his army to the area between Wan and Yeh, he and Ch'ing Pu gathering troops as they went along.

项羽闻汉王在宛，果引兵南，汉王坚壁不与战。
项羽听说汉王在宛县，果然率军南下。汉王加固壁垒，不跟他交战。
When Hsiang Yu heard that the king of Han was in Wan, he led his forces south as had been expected, but the king of Han remained within his fortifications and would not engage in battle.

是时彭越渡睢水，与项声、薛公战下邳，彭越大破楚军。
这时候，彭越渡过睢水，和项声、薛公在下邳交战，彭越大败楚军。
At this time P'eng Yueh crossed the Sui River and fought with the Ch'u general Hsiang Sheng and the lord of Hsieh at Hsia-p'ei, defeating their army.

项羽乃引兵东击彭越。汉王亦引兵北军成皋。
于是项羽就率军东进去攻打彭越。汉王同时也就率军北进，驻扎在成皋。
Hsiang Yu then led his troops east to attack P'eng Yueh, while the king of Han in the meantime marched north and camped at Ch'eng-kao.

项羽已破走彭越，闻汉王复军成皋，乃复引兵西，拔荥阳，诛周苛、枞公，而虏韩王信，遂围成皋。
项羽打跑了彭越，听说汉王又驻进了成皋，就率军向西，攻下了荥阳，杀死了周苛、枞公，并且俘虏了韩王信，接着包围了成皋。
After Hsiang Yu had defeated P'eng Yueh and put him to flight, he received news that the king of Han had moved his camp to Ch'eng-kao. He accordingly led his troops back west, and seized Jung-yang, executing Chou K'o and Lord Tsung and taking Hsin, the king of Hann, prisoner, and then proceeded to surround Ch'eng-kao.

汉王跳，独与滕公共车出成皋玉门，北渡河，驰宿修武。
汉王逃走，只和滕公共乘一车从成皋北面的玉门逃去，往北渡过黄河，驱马跑到夜晚，留宿在修武。
The king of Han fled, accompanied only by Lord Teng in a single carriage, escaping by the Jade Gate of the city of Ch'eng-kao. Hastening north across the Yellow River, he stopped for a night at Hsiu-wu.

自称使者，晨驰入张耳、韩信壁，而夺之军。
他自称是使者，在第二天清晨，冲入张耳、韩信的军营，夺了他们的军权。
At dawn the next day, pretending to be an envoy from the king, he hurriedly entered the fortifications of Chang Erh and Han Hsin and seized command of their armies.

乃使张耳北益收兵赵地，使韩信东击齐。
又派张耳往北到赵地去大量收集兵卒，派韩信东进攻打齐国。
He at once dispatched Chang Erh to proceed north and gather more troops in the region of Chao and sent Han Hsin east to attack Chi.

汉王得韩信军，则复振。引兵临河，南飨军小修武南，欲复战。
汉王取得了韩信的军队，重新振作起来，率军南进临近了黄河，在小修武的南面犒劳部队，想要跟项羽再战。
Having gained command of Han Hsin's army and recovered his strength, the king of Han led his troops to the edge of the Yellow River and camped south of Little Hsiu-wu, facing south across the river. He intended to proceed once more to battle.

郎中郑忠乃说止汉王，使高垒深堑，勿与战。
郎中郑忠劝阻汉王，让他加深壕沟，增高壁垒坚守，不要跟楚军作战。
But his attendant Cheng Chung advised him not to fight but instead to fortify his position with high walls and deep moats.

汉王听其计，使卢绾、刘贾将卒二万人，骑数百，渡白马津，人楚地，与彭越复击破楚军燕郭西，遂复下梁地十余城。
汉王听从了他的计谋，派卢绾、刘贾率兵二万人，骑兵数百名，渡过白马津，进入楚地，跟彭越的军队一起在燕县西面再次打败了楚军，接着又攻下了梁地的十多座城池。
The king followed this advice, sending Lu Wan and Liu Chia to lead a force of twenty thousand infantry and several hundred horsemen across the Yellow River at the White Horse Ford to invade Ch'u. They joined P'eng Yueh in attacking and defeating the Ch'u army west of Yen-kuo, and then proceeded to seize control of ten or more cities in the region of Liang.

淮阴已受命东，未渡平原。
淮阴侯韩信已受命东进，还没有渡过平原津。
Han Hsin had already been ordered to march east but had not yet crossed the Ping-yuan Ford.

汉王使郦生往说齐王田广，广叛楚，与汉和，共击项羽。
这时，汉王却暗中派郦食其前去游说齐王田广，田广叛楚，与汉和好，共同进攻项羽。
When the king of Han dispatched Master Li I-chi to go to Chi and plead with T'ien Kuang, the king of Chi, as a result T'ien Kuang revolted against Ch'u and joined in alliance with Han, agreeing to participate in an attack on Hsiang Yu.

韩信用蒯通计，遂袭破齐。
韩信见此，本想停止攻齐，蒯通劝他还是要攻下齐国，于是听了蒯通的主意，袭击并打败了齐军。
But Han Hsin, following the advice of Kuai Tung, proceeded to attack Chi in spite of this, inflicting a defeat.

齐王烹郦生，东走高密。
齐王用大鼎把郦食其煮死，向东逃到高密。
The king of Chi boiled Master Li I-chi alive for his supposed treachery and marched east to Kao-mi.

项羽闻韩信已举河北兵破齐、赵，且欲击楚，则使龙且、周兰往击之。
项羽听说韩信已率河北军攻占了齐国、赵国，将要进攻楚国，就派龙且、周兰前去攻打韩信。
When Hsiang Yu heard that Han Hsin had already raised a force of troops north of the river, defeated Chi and Chao, and was about to attack Ch'u, he dispatched Lung Ch'u and Chou Lan to attack him.

韩信与战，骑将灌婴击，大破楚军，杀龙且。
韩信跟他们交战，骑将灌婴出击，大败楚军，杀了龙且。
Han Hsin, aided in battle by the cavalry general Kuan Ying, attacked them and defeated the Ch'u army, killing Lung Ch'u.

齐王广奔彭越。
齐王田广奔往彭越处。
T'ien Kuang, the king of Chi, fled to P'eng Yueh.

当此时，彭越将兵居梁地，往来苦楚兵，绝其粮食。
这时候，彭越带兵驻在梁地，往来袭击骚扰楚军，断绝楚军的粮食供给。
At this time P'eng Yueh was in the region of Liang, leading his troops back and forth, harassing the Ch'u forces and cutting off their supplies of food.

四年，项羽乃谓海春侯大司马曹咎曰：“谨守成皋。若汉挑战，慎勿与战，无令得东而已。我十五日必定梁地，复从将军。”
四年（前203），项羽对海春侯大司马曹咎说：“你们谨慎地守住成皋。如果汉军挑战，千万不要应战，只要别让他们东进就可以了。我在十五天之内一定能平定梁地，回头再跟将军们会合。”
In the fourth year (203 B.C.), Hsiang Yu said to the marquis of Hai-ch'un, the grand marshal Ts'ao Chiu, "Hold fast to the city of Ch'eng-kao. Even if the king of Han challenges you to a battle, take care and do not fight with him. By no means let him advance to the east. In fifteen days I will be able to bring the region of Liang under control and then I will join you again."

乃行，击陈留、外黄、睢阳，下之。
便率兵去攻打陈留、外黄、睢阳，都攻下来了。
He then proceeded to attack and subdue Ch'en-liu, Wai-huang, and Sui-yang.

汉果数挑楚军，楚军不出，使人辱之五六日，大司马怒，度兵汜水。
汉军果然多次向楚军挑战，楚军都不出来，汉军派人辱骂他们，接连五六天，曹咎气愤之极，领兵横渡汜水。
As Hsiang Yu had foreseen, the king of Han several times challenged the Ch'u armies to battle, but they refused to take up the challenge. Then the king of Han sent men to insult and revile them for five or six days, until the grand marshal in anger led his troops across the Ssu River.

士卒半渡，汉击之，大破楚军，尽得楚国金玉货赂。
士兵刚刚渡到一半，汉军出击，大败楚军，缴获了楚国的全部金玉财物。
When the soldiers were halfway across the river the Han forces fell upon them, inflicting a crushing defeat on Ch'u and seizing all the gold, treasures, and wealth of the kingdom of Ch'u.

大司马咎、长史欣皆自刭汜水上。
大司马曹咎、长史司马欣都在汜水上自刎了。
The grand marshal Ts'ao Chiu and Ssu-ma Hsin, the chief secretary, both committed suicide by cutting their throats on the banks of the Ssu River.

项羽至睢阳，闻海春侯破，乃引兵还。
项羽到达睢阳，听说海春侯被打败，就率军赶回来。
When Hsiang Yu reached Sui-yang he received word of Ts'ao Chiu's defeat and led his forces back.

汉军方围钟离眛于荥阳东，项羽至，尽走险阻。
汉军这时把钟离眛围困在荥阳东面，项羽到来，汉兵已全部跑到深山险阻地带去了。
The Han forces had at the time encircled Chung-li Mo at Jung-yang, but on Hsiang Yu's arrival they all fled to the safety of the mountains.

韩信已破齐，使人言曰：“齐边楚，权轻，不为假王，恐不能安齐。”
韩信攻下齐国后，派人去对汉王说：“齐国和楚国临界，我的权力太小，如果不立个代理之王，恐怕不能安定齐地。”
After Han Hsin had defeated Chi, he sent someone to report to the king of Han, saying, "Chi lies directly upon the border of Ch'u and my grip upon it is still unsure. I fear that unless I am given the title of acting king I will not be able to hold the area."

汉王欲攻之，留侯曰：“不如因而立之，使自为守。”
汉王想去攻打韩信，留侯张良说：“不如趁此机会立他为齐王，让他自己为自己守住齐地。”
The king of Han was in favor of attacking Han Hsin, but Chang Liang said, "It is better to comply with his request and make him a king so that he will guard the area in his own interest."

乃遣张良操印绶立韩信为齐王。
于是汉王派张良带着王印到齐国封韩信为齐王。
The king of Han accordingly dispatched Chang Liang to present the seals and cords of authority, setting up Han Hsin as king of Chi.

项羽闻龙且军破，则恐，使盱台人武涉说韩信，韩信不听。
项羽听说龙且的军队被打败，就害怕了，派盱台人武涉去游说韩信反汉。韩信没有同意。
When Hsiang Yu heard that Han Hsin had defeated Lung Chu's army, he was very much afraid and sent Wu She, a man of Hsui, to attempt to bargain with Han Hsin, but Han Hsin would not listen to his arguments.

楚汉久相持未决，于壮苦军旅，老弱罢转饷。
楚汉两军相持很久，胜负未决，年轻人厌倦了长期的行军作战，老弱者由于运送粮饷疲惫不堪。
For a long while Ch'u and Han held their respective positions and made no decisive move, while their fighting men suffered the hardships of camp life and their old men and boys wore themselves out transporting provisions.

汉王项羽相与临广武之间而语。
汉王和项羽隔着广武涧对话。
The king of Han and Hsiang Yu faced each other across the ravine of Kuang-wu and talked back and forth.

项羽欲与汉王独身挑战。
项羽要跟汉王单独决一雌雄。
Hsiang Yu challenged the king of Han to meet him in single combat.

汉王数项羽曰：“始与项羽俱受命怀王，曰先入定关中者王之，项羽负约，王我于蜀汉，罪一。”
汉王则一项一项地列举项羽的罪状说：“当初我和你项羽一同受怀王之命，说定了先入关中者在关中为王，你项羽违背了约定，让我在蜀汉为王，这是你的第一条罪状。”
But the king berated Hsiang Yu, saying, "When you and I bowed together before the command of King Huai, we agreed that whoever should enter the Pass first and conquer the land within should become its king. But you went back on this agreement, making me king of Shu and Han instead. This was your first crime."

项羽矫杀卿子冠军而自尊，罪二。
你项羽假托怀王之命，杀了卿子冠军宋义，而自任上将军，这是你的第二条罪状。
Feigning orders from King Huai, you murdered his lordship Sung I, the commander of the army, and elevated yourself to his position. This was your second crime.

项羽已救赵，当还报，而擅劫诸侯兵入关，罪三。
你项羽奉命援救了赵国，本应当回报怀王，而你项羽却擅自劫持诸侯的军队入关，这是你的第三条罪状。
After you had gone to rescue Chao, it was proper that you should have returned and made your report to King Huai, but instead you wantonly seized the troops of the other leaders and entered the Pass. This was your third crime.

怀王约入秦无暴掠，项羽烧秦宫室，掘始皇帝冢，私收其财物，罪四。
怀王当初约定入关后不准烧杀掳掠，你却焚毁秦朝宫室，挖了始皇帝坟墓，私自收取秦地的财物，这是你的第四条罪状。
King Huai had promised that whoever entered the Pass would commit no violence or theft. Yet you fired the palaces of Ch'in, desecrated the grave of the First Emperor, and appropriated the wealth and goods of Chin for your private use. This was your fourth crime.

又强杀秦降王子婴，罪五。
你硬是杀掉已经投降的秦王子婴，这是你的第五条罪状。
You inflicted violent death upon Tzu-ying, the king of Chin, who had already surrendered; this was your fifth crime.

诈坑秦子弟新安二十万，王其将，罪六。
你采用欺诈手段在新安活埋了二十万秦兵，却封赏他们的降将，这是你的第六条罪状。
At Hsin-an you butchered two hundred thousand of the sons of Chin whom you had tricked into surrender and made their general, Chang Han, a king; this was your sixth crime.

项羽皆王诸将善地，而徙逐故主，令臣下争叛逆，罪七。
你项羽把各诸侯的将领都封在好地方，却迁移赶走原来的诸侯王，使得他们的臣下为争王位而反叛，这是你的第七条罪状。
You enfeoffed all your generals as kings in the best lands and transferred or exiled the former kings, setting their subjects to strife and rebellion; this was your seventh crime.

项羽出逐义帝彭城，自都之，夺韩王地，并王梁、楚，多自予，罪八。
你项羽把义帝赶出彭城，自己却在那里建都，又侵夺韩王的地盘，把梁、楚之地并在一起据为己有，这是你的第八条罪状。
You drove the Righteous Emperor from P'eng-ch'eng and set up your own capital there, seized the territory of the king of Han, and made yourself ruler of the combined areas of Liang and Ch'u, appropriating all for yourself. This was your eighth crime.

项羽使人阴弑义帝江南，罪九。
你项羽派人在江南秘密地杀了义帝，这是你的第九条罪状。
You sent a man in secret to assassinate the Righteous Emperor at Chiang-nan; this was your ninth crime.

夫为人臣而弑其主，杀已降，为政不平，主约不信，天下所不容，大逆无道，罪十也。
你为人臣子却谋杀君主，杀害已经投降之人，你为政不公，不守信约，不容于天下，大逆不道，这是你的第十条罪状。
As a subject you have assassinated your sovereign, you have murdered those who had already surrendered, administered your rule unjustly, and broken faith with the agreement that you made. You are guilty of such heinous treason as the world cannot forgive. This is your tenth crime.

吾以义兵从诸侯诛残贼，使刑余罪人击杀项羽，何苦乃与公挑战！
如今我率领义兵和诸侯们来讨你这个残害人的罪人，只让那些受过刑的罪犯就可以杀掉你项羽，又何必劳累我来跟你挑战呢？
I and my soldiers of righteousness have joined with the other nobles to punish tyranny and rebellion. I have plenty of criminals and ex-convicts that I can send to attack and kill you. Why should I go to the trouble of engaging in combat with you myself?

项羽大怒，伏弩射中汉王。
项羽十分恼怒，埋伏好的带机关的箭射中了汉王。
Hsiang Yu was enraged and, with a crossbow that he had concealed, shot and hit the king of Han.

汉王伤匈，乃扪足曰：“虏中吾指！”
汉王伤的是胸部，却按着脚说：“这个强盗射中了我的脚趾！”
The king was wounded in the breast, but he seized his foot and cried, "The scoundrel has hit me in the toe!"

汉王病创卧，张良强请汉王起行劳军，以安士卒，毋令楚乘胜于汉。
汉王因受箭伤而病倒了，张良硬是请他起来出去巡行，慰劳部队，以便稳定军心，不让楚军占胜利的威势压过汉军。
The king lay ill of his wound, but Chang Liang begged him to get up and walk about the camp in order to comfort and reassure his officers and men so that Ch'u would not be able to profit from its advantage.

汉王出行军，病甚，因驰入成皋。
汉王出去巡视军营，病情加重，立即赶回了成皋。
The king of Han went out and walked about his camp, but when the pain became too great he hurried into the city of Ch'eng-kao.

病愈，西入关，至栎阳，存问父老，置酒，枭故塞王欣头栎阳巿。
汉王病愈后，西行入关，来到栎阳，慰问当地父老，摆设酒席，杀了原塞王司马欣，把他的头悬挂在木杆上示众。
After his wound had healed, he retired west through the Pass until he reached Yueh-yang, where he held a feast for the elders of the city and set out wine for them. Then he had the head of the former king of Sai, Ssu-ma Hsin, exposed in the market place of his old capital Yueh-yang.

留四日，复如军，军广武。
汉王在栎阳停留了四天，又回到军中，部队驻扎在广武。
After staying for four days the king returned to his army, which was still camped at Kuang-wu.

关中兵益出。
这时候，关中的军队出关参战的也增多了。
A number of reinforcements of troops arrived from within the Pass.

当此时，彭越将兵居梁地，往来苦楚兵，绝其粮食。
这时候，彭越带兵驻在梁地，往来袭击骚扰楚军，断绝楚军的粮食供给。
At this time P'eng Yueh was in the region of Liang, leading his troops back and forth, harassing the Ch'u forces and cutting off their supplies of food.

田横往从之。
田横前往梁地依附他。
Tien Heng fled and joined him there.

项羽数击彭越等，齐王信又进击楚。
项羽多次攻击彭越等人，齐王韩信又进兵攻打楚军。
Hsiang Yu had several times attacked P'eng Yueh and the others when Han Hsin, the new king of Chi, appeared and began to attack Ch'u as well.

项羽恐，乃与汉王约，中分天下，割鸿沟而西者为汉，鸿沟而东者为楚。
项羽害怕了，就跟汉王约定，平分天下，鸿沟以西的地方划归汉，鸿沟以东的地方划归楚。
Hsiang Yu became fearful and made an agreement with the king of Han to divide the empire, all the territory west of the Hung Canal to belong to Han and all that east of the canal to belong to Ch'u.

项王归汉王父母妻子，军中皆呼万岁，乃归而别去。
项羽送回了汉王的家属，汉军官兵都呼喊万岁，然后项羽回营别去。
Hsiang Yu returned the king of Han's parents, wife, and children to him, amid cheers of welcome from the whole army of Han. Then the two leaders parted, and Hsiang Yu broke camp and started back east.

项羽解而东归。汉王欲引而西归，用留侯、陈平计，乃进兵追项羽，至阳夏南止军。
项羽罢兵回东方了，汉王也想率军回西方。但汉王采用张良、陈平的计策，乘楚军兵疲粮尽，索性就消灭它，于是进兵追赶项羽，到阳夏南面让部队驻扎下来。
The king of Han was about to lead his forces west but, on the advice of Chang Liang and Ch'en Ping, instead marched forward, sending his troops to pursue Hsiang Yu. When he reached the south of Yang-hsia, he stopped and made camp.

与齐王信、建成侯彭越期会而击楚军。
和齐王韩信、建成侯彭越约定日期会合，共同攻击楚军。
He arranged with Han Hsin and P'eng Yueh to meet on a certain date and join in an attack on Ch'u.

至固陵，不会。楚击汉军，大破之。
汉王到达固陵，韩信、彭越却没有来会合。楚军迎击汉军，把汉军打得大败。
But when he reached Ku-ling, they failed to appear for the meeting and Ch'u attacked Han, inflicting a grave defeat.

汉王复入壁，深堑而守之。
汉王又逃回营垒，深挖壕堑固守。
The king of Han again withdrew behind his fortifications, deepened his moats, and guarded his position.

用张良计，于是韩信、彭越皆往。
又采用张良的计策派使者封给韩信、彭越土地，使他们各自为战，于是韩信、彭越都来会合了。
Using a plan suggested by Chang Liang, he was finally able to induce Han Hsin and P'eng Yueh to join him.

及刘贾入楚地，围寿春，汉王败固陵，乃使使者召大司马周殷举九江兵而迎武王，行屠城父。
黥布和刘贾进入楚地，围攻寿春，汉王却在固陵打了败仗，于是派人去召大司马周殷，让他出动九江军队去迎接武王黥布，行军途中屠戮了城父。
Liu Chia also invaded Ch'u and surrounded Shou-ch'un. When the king of Han was defeated at Ku-ling, he sent an envoy to invite the grand marshal of Ch'u, Chou Yin, to revolt. Accordingly Chou Yin raised the forces of Chiu-chiang and marched to join Liu Chia and Ching Pu, the king of Wu, in massacring the inhabitants of Ch'eng-fu.

随刘贾、齐梁诸侯皆大会垓下。
然后随刘贾、齐、梁诸侯的军队在垓下大会师。
Following Liu Chia, he and the leaders of Chi and Liang all joined in a general meeting at Kai-hsia.

立武王布为淮南王。
汉王封武王黥布为淮南王。
At which Ching Pu was made king of Huai-nan.

五年，高祖与诸侯兵共击楚军，与项羽决胜垓下。
五年，高祖和诸侯军共同进攻楚军，与项羽在垓下决战。
In the fifth year, the king of Han with the forces of the other leaders joined in an attack on the army of Ch'u, fighting with Hsiang Yu for a decisive victory at Kai-hsia.

淮阴侯将三十万自当之，孔将军居左，费将军居右，皇帝在后，绛侯、柴将军在皇帝后。
淮阴侯韩信率领三十万大军与楚军正面对阵，他的部将孔将军在左边，费将军在右边，汉王领兵随后，绛侯周勃、柴将军跟在汉王的后面。
Han Hsin led a force of three hundred thousand to attack in the center, with General K'ung leading the left flank and General Fei leading the right flank, while the king of Han followed behind. Chou Po, the marquis of Chiang, and General Ch'ai followed behind the king.

项羽之卒可十万。
项羽的军队大约有十万。
Hsiang Yu's troops numbered some one hundred thousand.

淮阴先合，不利，却。
淮阴侯首先跟楚军交锋，不利，向后退却。
Han Hsin advanced and joined in combat but, failing to gain the advantage, retired.

孔将军、费将军纵，楚兵不利。
孔将军、费将军从左右两边纵兵攻上去，楚军不利。
And allowed General K'ung and General Fei to close in from the sides. When the Ch'u forces began to falter.

淮阴侯复乘之，大败垓下。
淮阴侯乘势再次攻上去，大败楚军于垓下。
Han Hsin took advantage of their weakness to inflict a great defeat at Kai-hsia.

项羽卒闻汉军之楚歌，以为汉尽得楚地，项羽乃败而走，是以兵大败。
项羽的士兵听到汉军唱起了楚地的歌，以为汉军已经完全占领了楚地，项羽战败逃走，楚军因此全部崩溃。
The soldiers of Hsiang Yu, hearing the Han armies singing the songs of Ch'u, concluded that Han had already conquered the whole land of Ch'u. With this, Hsiang Yu fled in despair, leaving his soldiers to suffer total defeat.

使骑将灌婴追杀项羽东城，斩首八万，遂略定楚地。
汉王派骑将灌婴追杀项羽，一直追到东城，杀了八万楚兵，终于攻占平定了楚地。
The king of Han dispatched his cavalry general Kuan Ying to pursue and kill Hsiang Yu at Tung-ch'eng. After cutting off the heads of eighty thousand of the enemy, he overran and conquered the land of Ch'u.

鲁为楚坚守不下。
只有鲁县人还为项羽坚守，不肯降服。
Lu held out on behalf of Hsiang Yu and refused to surrender.

汉王引诸侯兵北，示鲁父老项羽头，鲁乃降。
汉王就率领诸侯军北上，把项羽的头给鲁县的父老们看，鲁人这才投降。
But when the king of Han led the forces of the various nobles north and displayed the head of Hsiang Yu before the elders of Lu, they finally capitulated.

遂以鲁公号葬项羽穀城。
于是，汉王按照鲁公这一封号的礼仪，把项羽葬在穀城。
The king of Han buried Hsiang Yu at Ku-ch'eng with the title of "Duke of Lu."

还至定陶，驰入齐王壁，夺其军。
然后回师定陶，驱马驰入齐王韩信的军营，夺了他的兵权。
He then returned to Ting-t'ao, hastily entered the fortifications of Han Hsin, the king of Chi, and seized control of his army.

正月，诸侯及将相相与共请尊汉王为皇帝。
正月，诸侯及将相们共同尊请汉王为皇帝。
In the first month, the various nobles and generals all joined in begging the king of Han to take the title of emperor.

汉王曰：“吾闻帝贤者有也，空言虚语，非所守也，吾不敢当帝位。”
汉王说：“我听说皇帝的尊号，贤能的人才能据有，空言虚语，不是我所要的，我可承担不了皇帝的尊号。”
But he replied, "I have heard that the position of emperor may go only to a worthy man. It cannot be claimed by empty words and vain talk. I do not dare to accept the position of emperor."

群臣皆曰：“大王起徽细，诛暴逆，平定四海，有功者辄裂地而封为王侯。大王不尊号，皆疑不信。臣等以死守之。”
大臣们都说：“大王从平民起事，诛伐暴逆，平定四海，有功的分赏土地封为王侯，如果大王不称皇帝尊号，人们对大王的封赏就都不会相信。我们这班人愿意以死相请求。”
His followers all replied, "Our great king has risen from the humblest beginnings to punish the wicked and violent and bring peace to all within the four seas. To those who have achieved merit he has accordingly parceled out land and enfeoffed them as kings and marquises. If our king does not assume the supreme title, then all our titles as well will be called into doubt. On pain of death we urge our request!"

汉王三让，不得已，曰：“诸君必以为便，便国家。”
汉王辞让再三，实在推辞不过了，才说：“既然诸位认为这样合适，那我就为了国家的便利吧。”
The king of Han three times declined and then, seeing that he could do no more, said, "If you, my lords, consider it a good thing, then it must be to the good of the country."

甲午，乃即皇帝位汜水之阳。
甲午日，汉王在汜水北面登临皇帝之位。
On the day Chia-wu, he assumed the position of Supreme Emperor on the north banks of the Ssu River.

皇帝曰义帝无后。齐王韩信飞楚风俗，徙为楚王，都下邳。
皇帝提到义帝没有后代。因为齐王韩信熟悉楚地的风俗，就改封韩信为楚王，建都下邳。
The Supreme Emperor declared, "The Righteous Emperor of Ch'u was without an heir, but Han Hsin, king of Chi, is well acquainted with the customs and ways of Ch'u." Accordingly he transferred Han Hsin to the position of king of Ch'u with his capital at Hsia-p'ei.

立建成侯彭越为梁王，都定陶。
封建成侯彭越为梁王，建都定陶。
P'eng Yueh, the marquis of Chien-ch'eng, was made king of Liang, with his capital at Ting-tao.

故韩王信为韩王，都阳翟。
原韩王信仍旧为韩王，建都阳翟。
Hsin, the former king of Hann, was confirmed in his title, with his capital at Yang-ti.

徙衡山王吴芮日为长沙王，都临湘。
改封衡山王吴芮为长沙王，建都临湘。
Wu Jui, the king of Heng-shan, was transferred to the position of king of Ch'ang-sha, his capital at Lin-hsiang.

番君之将梅鋗有功，从入武关，故德番君。
番君的部将梅鋗有功劳，曾经随汉军进入武关，所以皇帝感激番君。
Wu Jui's general, Mei Hsuan, had won merit in battle while he himself had joined in the march through the Wu Pass, and therefore he was rewarded in this fashion.

淮南王布、燕王臧荼、赵王敖皆如故。
淮南王黥布、燕王臧荼、赵王张敖封号都不改变。
Ching Pu, the king of Huai-nan; Tsang Tu, the king of Yen; and Chang Ao, the king of Chao, remained in their former positions.

天下大定。高祖都雒阳，诸侯皆臣属。
天下全都平定了，高祖定都在洛阳，诸侯都称臣归从于高祖。
With the entire empire now at peace, Kao-tsu made his capital at Lo-yang, where all the nobles acknowledged his sovereignty.

故临江王驩为项羽叛汉，令卢绾、刘贾围之，不下，数月而降，杀之雒阳。
原临江王共驩为项羽效忠，反叛汉朝，高祖派卢绾、刘贾去包围了他，没有攻下。过了几个月共驩才投降，在洛阳把他杀了。
Huan, the former king of Lin-chiang, had in the name of Hsiang Yu revolted against Han, but Lu Wan and Liu Chia were sent to surround him and, though he held out for several months, he was eventually forced to surrender and was killed at Lo-yang.

五月，兵皆罢归家。
五月，士兵都遣散回家了。
In the fifth month the armies were disbanded and the soldiers returned to their homes.

诸侯子在关中者复之十二岁，其归者复之六岁，食之一岁。
各诸侯子弟留在关中的，免除赋税徭役十二年，回到封国去的免除赋税徭役六年，国家供养他们一年。
The relatives of the feudal lords who remained in the area within the Pass were exempted from all taxes and service for twelve years, while those who returned to their territories were exempted for six years and granted stipends of food for a year.

高祖置酒雒阳南宫。
高祖在洛阳南宫摆设酒宴。
Kao-tsu gave a banquet for the nobles in the Southern Palace of Lo-yang.

高祖曰：“列诸侯将无敢隐朕，皆言其情。吾所以有天下者何？项氏之所以失天下者何？”
高祖说：“列侯和各位将领，你们不能瞒我，都要说真心话。我之所以能取得天下，是因为什么呢？项羽之所以失去天下，又是因为什么呢？”
And announced, "My lords and generals, I ask you all to speak your minds quite frankly without daring to hide anything from me. Why is it that I won possession of the world and Hsiang Yu lost?"

高起、王陵对曰：“陛下慢而侮人，项羽仁而爱人。然陛下使人攻城略地，所降下者因以予之，与天下同利也。项羽妒贤嫉能，有功者害之，贤者疑之，战胜而不予人功，得地而不予人利，此所以失天下也。”
高起、王陵回答说：“陛下傲慢而且好侮辱别人；项羽仁厚而且爱护别人。可是陛下派人攻打城池夺取土地，所攻下和降服的地方就分封给人们，跟天下人同享利益。而项羽却妒贤嫉能，有功的就忌妒人家，有才能的就怀疑人家，打了胜仗不给人家授功，夺得了土地不给人家好处，这就是他失去天下的原因。”
Kao Chi and Wang Ling replied, "Your Majesty is arrogant and insulting to others, while Hsiang Yu was kind and loving. But when you send someone to attack a city or seize a region, you award him the spoils of the victory, sharing your gains with the whole world. Hsiang Yu was jealous of worth and ability, hating those who had achieved merit and suspecting anyone who displayed his wisdom. No matter what victories were achieved in battle, he gave his men no reward; no matter what lands they won, he never shared with them the spoils. This is why he lost possession of the world."

高祖曰：“公知其一，未知其二。夫运筹策帷帐之中，决胜于千里之外，吾不如子房。”
高祖说：“你们只知其一，不知其二。如果说运筹帷幄之中，决胜于千里之外，我比不上张子房。”
Kao-tsu said, "You have understood the first reason, but you do not know the second. When it comes to sitting within the tents of command and devising strategies that will assure us victory a thousand miles away, I am no match for Chang Liang."

镇国家，抚百姓，给餽饷，不绝粮道，吾不如萧何。
镇守国家，安抚百姓，供给粮饷，保证运粮道路不被阻断，我比不上萧何。
In ordering the state and caring for the people, in providing rations for the troops and seeing to it that the lines of supply are not cut off, I cannot compare to Hsiao Ho.

连百万之军，战必胜，攻必取，吾不如韩信。
统率百万大军，战则必胜，攻则必取，我比不上韩信。
In leading an army of a million men, achieving success with every battle and victory with every attack, I cannot come up to Han Hsin.

此三者，皆人杰也，吾能用之，此吾所以取天下也。
这三个人都是人中的俊杰，我却能够使用他们，这就是我能够取得天下的原因所在。
These three are all men of extraordinary ability, and it is because I was able to make use of them that I gained possession of the world.

项羽有一范增而不能用，此其所以为我擒也。
项羽虽然有一位范增却不信用，这就是他被我擒获的原因。
Hsiang Yu had his one Fan Tseng, but he did not know how to use him and thus he ended as my prisoner.

高祖欲长都雒阳，齐人刘敬说，及留侯劝上入都关中，高祖是日驾，入都关中。
高祖打算长期定都洛阳，齐人刘敬劝说，还有留侯张良也劝说高祖进入关中去定都，高祖当天就起驾入关，到关中去建都。
Kao-tsu wished to continue to make his capital at Lo-yang, but Liu Ching, a man of Chi, advised him against this and Chang Liang likewise urged him to establish his capital within the Pass. Accordingly, on the same day Kao-tsu mounted his carriage and entered the Pass to take up residence there.

六月，大赦天下。
六月，大赦天下。
In the sixth month he proclaimed a general amnesty for the empire.

十月，燕王臧荼反，攻下代地。
十月，燕王臧荼造反，攻下了代地。
In the seventh month, Tsang Tu, the king of Yen, revolted, invading and seizing control of the land of Tai.

高祖自将击之，得燕王臧荼。
高祖亲自率军前去讨伐，擒获了燕王臧荼。
Kao-tsu himself led a force to attack and capture him.

即立太尉卢绾为燕王。
当即封太尉卢绾为燕王。
He proceeded to set up the grand commandant Lu Wan as the new king of Yen.

使丞相哙将兵攻代。
派丞相樊哙领兵去攻打代地。
Sending Fan K'uai with a force of troops to attack Tai.

其秋，利几反，高祖自将兵击之，利几走。
这一年的秋天，利几造反，高祖又亲自带兵去讨伐，利几败逃。
In the autumn, Li Chi revolted. Kao-tsu again led the troops in person to attack him, whereupon Li Chi fled.

利几者，项氏之将。项氏败，利几为陈公，不随项羽，亡降高祖，高祖侯之颍川。
利几原先是项羽的部将。项羽失败时，利几是陈县县令，没有跟随项羽，逃出归降了高祖。高祖把他封在颍川为侯。
Li Chi had originally been a general of the Hsiang family. When the Hsiangs were defeated, Li Chi, then the governor of the district of Ch'en, revoked his allegiance to the Hsiangs and fled and surrendered to Kao-tsu. Kao-tsu made him marquis of Ying-ch'uan.

高祖至雒阳，举通侯籍召之，而利几恐，故反。
高祖到达洛阳后，召见全部在名册的列侯，利几心里害怕，所以就造反了。
When Kao-tsu arrived in Lo-yang, he summoned to court all the marquises whose titles had thus far been registered, but Li Chi, misinterpreting the summons and fearing punishment for his former connection with the Hsiangs, revolted.

六年，高祖五日一朝太公，如家人父子礼。
六年，高祖每五天朝拜太公一次，按照一般人家父子相见的礼节。
The sixth year: Every five days Kao-tsu would go to visit his father, the "Venerable Sire," observing the etiquette proper to an ordinary son towards his father.

太公家令说太公曰：“天无二日，土无二王。今高祖虽子，人主也；太公虽父，人臣也。奈何令人主拜人臣！如此，则威重不行。”
太公的家令劝说太公道：“天上不会有两个太阳，地上不应有两个君主。当今皇帝在家虽然是儿子，在天下却是万民之主，太公您在家虽然是父亲，对皇帝却是臣子。怎么能够叫万民之主拜见他的臣子呢！这样做，皇帝的威严就不能遍行天下了。”
The steward of his father's household spoke to the Venerable Sire, saying, "As heaven is without two suns, so the earth has not two lords. Now although the emperor is your son, he is the ruler of men, and although you are his father, you are his subject as well. How does it happen then that the ruler of men is doing obeisance to one of his subjects? If this is allowed to continue, the emperor's majesty will never prevail upon the world!"

后高祖朝，太公拥篲迎门却行。
后来高祖再去朝见太公，太公就抱着扫帚，面对门口倒退着走。
The next time Kao-tsu came to visit, his father, bearing a broom in his hands as a sign of servitude, went to the gate to greet him and stood respectfully to one side.

高祖大掠下扶太公。
高祖大为吃惊，急忙下车搀扶太公。
Kao-tsu in great astonishment descended from his carriage and hastened to his father's side.

太公曰：“帝，人主也，奈何以我乱天下法！”
太公说：“皇帝是万民之主，怎么能因为我而乱了天下的规矩呢！”
"The emperor is the ruler of men," his father said. "How should he on my account violate the laws of the empire?"

于是高祖乃尊太为太上皇。心善家令言，赐金五百斤。
于是高祖就尊奉太公为太上皇，心里赞赏那个家令的话，赐给他五百斤黄金。
With this Kao-tsu honored his father with the title of "Grand Supreme Emperor" and, because he was secretly pleased with the advice of his father's steward, he awarded the man five hundred catties of gold.

十二月，人有上变事告楚王信谋反，上问左右，左右争欲击之。
十二月，有人上书报告楚王韩信谋反作乱的事，高祖向左右大臣询问对策，大臣们都争着想去征讨。
In the twelfth month someone reported a case of disaffection to the emperor, announcing that Han Hsin, the king of Ch'u, was plotting a revolt. When the emperor consulted his advisers, they all urged him to attack.

用陈平计，乃伪游云梦，会诸侯于陈，楚王信迎，即因执之。
最后高祖采用了陈平的计策，假装去游览云梦泽，在陈县召见诸侯，楚王韩信来迎接，就趁机拘捕他。
But, rejecting this advice, he instead employed a strategy suggested by Ch'en Ping whereby, pretending to embark upon a pleasure visit to Yun-meng, he summoned the various feudal lords to a meeting at Ch'en. When Han Hsin appeared at the meeting, Kao-tsu immediately seized him.

是日，大赦天下。
当天，大赦天下。
The same day he proclaimed a general amnesty to the empire.

田肯贺，因说高祖曰：“陛下得韩信，又治秦中。秦，形胜之国，带河山之险，县隔千里，持戟百万，秦得百二焉。”
田肯来祝贺，趁便劝说高祖道：“陛下抓住了韩信，又在关中建都。秦地是形势险要之地，周围有山河环绕，与关东有千里长的疆界被山河阻隔。如果关东拥有百万军队，那么秦地只需兵力二万就可以抵挡住。”
Tien K'en congratulated the emperor upon his success, saying, "Your Majesty has succeeded in seizing Han Hsin, and also fixed the capital in the area of Chin within the Pass. The land of Chin is of superlative configuration, surrounded by natural barriers of rivers and mountains and stretching a thousand miles. He who commands an army of a million lances commands a hundred times that number if he holds the land of Chin."

地势便利，其以下兵于诸侯，譬犹居高屋之上建瓴水也。
秦地地势这样有利，如果对诸侯用兵，就好象从高屋檐角的滴水器往下流水一样，居高临下，势不可挡。
From such an advantageous stronghold, sending forth troops to subdue the feudal lords is as easy as standing on a roof and pouring down water from a jug.

夫齐，东有琅邪、即墨之饶，南有泰山之固，西有浊河之限，北有勃海之利。
还有齐地，东有琅邪、即墨的富饶，南有泰山的险固，西有黄河的天险，北有渤海的地利。
But the land of Chi too has its rich fields of Lang-ya and Chi-mo in the east, the fastnesses of Mount T'ai to the south, in the west the banks of the muddy Yellow River, and in the north the resources of the Bohai Sea.

地方二千里，持戟百万，县隔千里之外，齐得十二焉。
土地纵横各二千里，与诸侯的疆界被山水阻隔，超过千里，如果诸侯拥有百万军队，那么齐地只需二十万就可以抵挡住。
Its land stretches for two thousand miles. He who commands an army of a million lances in this vast area commands ten times that number when he holds the land of Chi.

故此东西秦也。非亲子弟，莫可使王齐矣。”
所以说，齐地可以和秦地并称东秦和西秦。如果不是陛下的嫡亲子弟，就没有人可以派去做齐王。”
Therefore there is a Chin in the east as well as in the west. Only one of the emperor's sons or brothers is fit to be made king of Chi."

高祖曰：“善。”赐黄金五百斤。
高祖说：“好。”赏给他黄金五百斤。
Kao-tsu approved his words and rewarded him with five hundred catties of yellow gold.

后十余日，封韩信为淮阴侯，分其地为二国。
十多天以后，封韩信为淮阴侯，把他原来的封地分为两个侯国。
Ten or so days later he enfeoffed Han Hsin as marquis of Huai-yin. Han Hsin's original fief he divided into two kingdoms.

高祖曰将军刘贾数有功，以为荆王，王淮东。
高祖说，将军刘贾屡次立功，就封他为荆王，统治淮水以东。
Because General Liu Chia had several times achieved merit, he enfeoffed him as king of Ching, ruling over one of them, the area of Huai-tung.

弟交为楚王，王淮西。
又封他的弟弟刘交为楚王，统治淮水以西。
He made his younger brother Liu Chiao king of Ch'u, ruling over the other, the area of Huai-hsi.

子肥为齐王，王七十余城，民能齐言者皆属齐。
封皇子刘肥为齐王，统辖七十多座城，老百姓凡是能说齐国话的都属于齐国。
His own son Liu Fei he made king of Chi, ruling over more than seventy cities of Chi; all the people who spoke the dialect of Chi were to belong to the fief of Chi.

乃论功，与诸列侯部符行封。
高祖于是评定功绩，进行封赏，与各列侯剖开刻有封侯字样的符节，一半留在朝廷，一半交给受封者，以做凭证。
The emperor held debates upon the merits of his followers and presented to the various feudal lords the split tallies, symbols of their formal enfeoffment.

徙韩王信太原。
让韩王信迁徙到太原郡。
He transferred Hsin, the king of Han, to the region of T'ai-yuan.

七年，匈奴攻韩王信马邑，信因与谋反太原。
七年，匈奴在马邑攻打韩王信，韩王信就与匈奴在太原谋反。
In the seventh year, the Hsiung-nu attacked Hsin, the king of Han, at Ma-i. Hsin joined with them in plotting a revolt in T'ai-yuan.

白土曼丘巨、王黄立故赵将赵利为王以反，高祖自往击之。
他的部将在白土城的曼丘臣、王黄拥立前赵将赵利为王，也反叛朝廷。高祖亲自率兵前往讨伐。
His generals, Man-chiu Ch'en of Pai-t'u and Wang Huang, set up Chao Li, a descendant of the royal family of Chao, as king of Chao in revolt against the emperor. Kao-tsu in person led a force to attack them.

会天寒，士卒堕指者什二三，遂至平城。
正赶上天气寒冷，士兵们冻掉手指的有十分之二三，于是赶到平城。
But he encountered such severe cold that two or three out of every ten of his soldiers lost their fingers from frostbite. At last he reached Ping-ch'eng.

匈奴围我平城，七日而后罢去。
匈奴军队包围了平城，七天之后才撤围离去。
Where the Hsiung-nu surrounded him. After seven days of siege they finally withdrew.

令樊哙止定代地。
高祖让樊哙留下平定代地。
Kao-tsu ordered Fan K'uai to remain behind and subdue the region of Tai.

立兄刘仲为代王。
封哥哥刘仲为代王。
And set up his older brother Liu Chung as king of Tai.

二月，高祖自平城过赵、雒阳，至长安。
二月，高祖从平城出发，经过赵国、洛阳，抵达长安。
In the second month Kao-tsu passed through Chao and Lo-yang and returned to the capital at Ch'ang-an.

长乐宫成，丞相已下徙治长安。
长安的长乐宫建成了，丞相萧何以下的官员们都迁到长安治事了。
With the completion of the Palace of Lasting Joy, the prime minister and subordinate officials all moved and took up residence in Ch'ang-an.

八年，高祖东击韩王信余反寇于东垣。
八年，高祖又率军东进，在东垣一带追击韩王信的残余反寇。
Eighth year: Kao-tsu marched east and attacked the remnants of the king of Han's revolutionaries at Tung-yuan.

萧丞相营作未央宫，立东阙、北阙、前殿、武库、太仓。
丞相萧相何主持营建未央宫，未央宫建东阙、北阙、前殿、武库、太仓。
The prime minister Hsiao Ho had been put in charge of the building of the Eternal Palace, constructing eastern and northern gate towers, a front hall, an arsenal, and a great storehouse.

高祖还，见宫阙壮甚，怒，谓萧何曰：“天下匈匈苦战数岁，成败未可知，是何治宫室过度也？”
高祖回来，看到宫殿非常壮观，很生气，对萧何说：“天下动荡纷乱，苦苦争战好几年，成败还不可确知，为什么要把宫殿修造得如此过分豪华壮美呢？”
When Kao-tsu returned from his expedition and saw the magnificence of the palace and its towers, he was extremely angry. "The empire is still in great turmoil," he said to Hsiao Ho, "and though we have toiled in battle these several years, we cannot tell yet whether we will achieve final success. What do you mean by constructing palaces like this on such an extravagant scale?"

萧何曰：“天下方未定，故可困遂就宫室。且夫天子以四海为家。非壮丽无以重威，且无令后世有以加也。”
萧何说：“正因为天下还没有安定，才可以利用这个时机建成宫殿。再说，天子以四海为家，宫殿不壮丽就无法树立天子的威严，而且也不能让后世超过呀。”
Hsiao Ho replied, "It is precisely because the fate of the empire is still uncertain that we must build such palaces and halls. A true Son of Heaven takes the whole world within the four seas to be his family. If he does not dwell in magnificence and beauty, he will have no way to manifest his authority, nor will he leave any foundation for his heirs to build upon."

高祖乃说。
高祖这才高兴了。
With these words, Kao-tsu's anger turned to delight.

高祖之东垣，过柏人，赵相贯高等谋弑高祖，高祖心动，因不留。
高祖到东垣去，经过柏人县，赵相贯高等人设下埋伏，想要谋杀高祖，高祖本想在柏人留宿，可是心里一动，就没有住在那里。
When Kao-tsu was on his way to Tung-yuan he passed through a place called Po-jen. The prime minister of Chao, Kuan Kao, and others were at this time plotting to assassinate Kao-tsu, but when Kao-tsu heard the name of the place he grew uneasy in his heart and proceeded on without stopping.

代王刘仲弃国亡，自归雒阳，废以为合阳侯。
代王刘仲弃国逃亡，到洛阳投案自首，高祖废掉了他的王位，改封为合阳侯。
Liu Chung, the king of Tai, fled from his kingdom and returned to Lo-yang. Accordingly he was deprived of his title and made marquis of Ho-yang.

九年，赵相贯高等事发觉，夷三族。
九年，赵相贯高等人企图谋杀高祖的事情被发觉，灭了他们的三族。
Ninth year: The plot of Kuan Kao and others to assassinate the emperor came to light, and they were executed along with their three sets of relatives.

废赵王敖为宣平侯。
废掉了赵王敖的王位，改封为宣平侯。
Chang Ao, the king of Chao, was removed from his position and made marquis of Hsuan-p'ing.

是岁，徙贵族楚昭、屈、景、怀、齐田氏关中。
这一年，把原来楚国的贵族昭氏、屈氏、景氏、怀氏和原来齐国贵族田氏等贵族迁到关中。
In this year the Chao, Ch'u, Ching, and Huai families of Ch'u and the T'ien family of Chi, all powerful noble clans, were moved to the area within the Pass.

未央宫成。高祖大朝诸侯群臣，置酒未央前殿。
未央宫建成了。高祖大会诸侯、群臣，在未央宫前殿摆设酒宴。
When the Eternal Palace was completed, Kao-tsu summoned the nobles and officials to a great reception, setting forth wine for them in the front hall of the palace.

高祖奉玉卮，起，为太上皇寿，曰：“始大人常以臣无赖，不能治产业，不如仲力。今某之业所就孰与仲多？”
高祖捧着玉制酒杯，起身向太上皇献酒祝寿，说：“当初大人常以为我没有才能，无可依仗，不会经营产业，比不上刘仲勤苦努力。可是现在我的产业和刘仲相比，谁的多呢？”
Kao-tsu rose and, lifting his jade cup, proposed a toast to his father, the Grand Supreme Emperor. "You, my father, always used to consider me a worthless fellow who could never look after the family fortunes and had not half the industry of my older brother Chung," he said, "Now that my labors are completed, which of us has accomplished more, Chung or I?"

殿上群臣皆呼万岁，大笑为乐。
殿上群臣都呼喊万岁，大笑取乐。
All the officials in the hall shouted "Long live the Emperor!" and roared with merryment.

十年十月，淮南王黥布、梁王彭越、燕王卢绾、荆王刘贾、楚王刘交、齐王刘肥、长沙王吴芮皆来朝长乐宫。
十年(前197)十月，淮南王黥布、梁王彭越、燕王卢绾、荆王刘贾、楚王刘交、齐王刘肥、长沙王吴芮都到长乐宫朝见高祖。
In the tenth month of the tenth year [197 B.C.] Ching Pu, the king of Huai-nan; P'eng Yueh, the king of Liang; Lu Wan, the king of Yen; Liu Chia, the king of Ching; Liu Chiao, the king of Ch'u; Liu Fei, the king of Chi; and Wu Jui, the king of Ch'ang-sha, all came to pay homage at the Palace of Lasting Joy.

春夏无事。
春天和夏天国家太平无事。
The spring and summer passed without incident.

七月，太上皇崩栎阳宫。
七月，太上皇在栎阳宫去世。
In the seventh month the Grand Supreme Emperor, father of Kao-tsu, passed away in the palace of Yueh-yang.

楚王、梁王皆来送葬。
楚王、梁王都来送葬。
The kings of Ch'u and Liang came to attend the funeral.

赦栎阳囚。
赦免栎阳的囚徒。
All prisoners in the district of Yueh-yang were freed.

更命郦邑曰新丰。
把郦邑改名为新丰。
and the name of the city of Li was changed to "New Feng."

八月，赵相国陈豨反代地。
八月，赵相国陈豨在代地造反。
In the eighth month Ch'en Hsi, prime minister of the kingdom of Chao, started a revolt in the region of Tai.

上曰：“豨尝为吾使，甚有信。”
皇上说：“陈豨曾经给我做事，很有信用。”
"Ch'en Hsi," said the emperor, "formerly acted as my envoy, and I had the deepest faith in him."

代地吾所急也，故封豨为列侯，以相国守代。
代地我认为是很重要的地方，所以封陈豨为列侯，以相国的身份镇守代地。
"Tai is a region of crucial importance to me, and therefore I enfeoffed Ch'en Hsi as a marquis and made him prime minister of the kingdom so that he could guard Tai for me."

今乃与王黄等劫掠代地！
如今他竟然和王黄等人劫掠代地！
"But now he has joined with Wang Huang and the rest in plundering the land of Tai."

代地吏民非有罪也，其赦代吏民。
但是代地的官吏和百姓并没有罪，全都赦免他们。
"The officials and people of Tai, however, are not to blame for this and therefore I absolve them of all guilt."

九月，上自东往击之。
九月，高祖亲自率军往东，前去讨伐陈豨。
In the ninth month the emperor marched east to attack the rebels.

至邯郸，上喜曰：“豨不南据邯郸而阻漳水，吾知其无能为也。”
到达邯郸，皇上高兴地说：“陈豨不向南占据邯郸反而凭借漳水据守，我知道他没什么本事。”
When he reached Han-tan he announced with joy, "Since Ch'en Hsi has not come south to occupy Han-tan and guard the frontier of the Chang River, I am confident he will never be able to do me much harm."

闻豨将皆故贾人也，上曰：“吾知所以与之。”
听说陈豨的部将都是过去的商人，皇上说：“我知道该怎么对付他们了。”
When he heard that all of Ch'en Hsi's generals had formerly been merchants he remarked, "I know how to take care of them."

乃多以金啖豨将，豨将多降者。
于是拿了许多黄金去引诱陈豨的部将，很多人都投降了。
Then he offered large sums of money to tempt them to desert, so that most of Ch'en Hsi's generals surrendered to him.

十一年，高祖在邯郸诛豨等未毕。
十一年(前196)，高祖在邯郸讨伐陈豨等人还没有完毕。
Eleventh year [196 B.C.]: While Kao-tsu was still in Han-tan engaged in putting down the revolt of Ch'en Hsi and his followers.

豨将侯敞将万余人游行，王黄军曲逆，张春渡河击聊城。
陈豨的部将侯敞带领一万多人在各地往来游动作战，王黄驻扎在曲逆，张春渡过黄河攻打聊城。
one of Ch'en's generals, Hou Ch'ang, with a band of some ten thousand men roamed from place to place, while Wang Huang camped at Ch'u-ni and Chang Ch'un crossed the Yellow River and attacked Liao-ch'eng.

汉使将军郭蒙与齐将击，大破之。
汉派将军郭蒙和齐国的将领去攻打他们，把他们打得大败。
Kao-tsu dispatched his general Kuo Meng to join with the general of Chi in attacking them, inflicting a decisive defeat.

太尉周勃道太原入，定代地，至马邑，马邑不下，即攻残之。
太尉周勃从太原攻入，平定了代地。到马邑时，马邑叛军不肯降服，周勃就摧毁了马邑。
The grand commandant Chou Po marched by way of T'ai-yuan into the region of Tai, conquering the area as far as Ma-i. When Ma-i refused to surrender, he attacked it and massacred its defenders.

豨将赵利守东垣，高祖攻之，不下。
陈豨的部将赵利坚守东垣，高祖去攻打，没有攻下。
Kao-tsu attacked Tung-yuan, which was being held by Ch'en Hsi's general Chao Li. The city held out.

月余，卒骂高祖，高祖怒。
攻了一个多月，东垣的士兵在城上辱骂高祖，高祖大怒。
for over a month, while its men cursed the emperor. When the city finally capitulated.

城降，令出骂者斩之，不骂者原之。
等到东垣被攻下以后，下令把辱骂过自己的人找出来斩了，不曾辱骂自己的人就宽恕了他们。
Kao-tsu had all those who had cursed him dragged forth and beheaded, while those who had not joined in cursing him he pardoned.

于是乃分赵山北，立子恒以为代王，都晋阳。
随后把赵国常山以北的地区划归代国，立皇子刘恒为代王，建都晋阳。
With this, he took from Chao the land north of the Ch'ang Mountains and assigned it to Tai, setting up his son Liu Heng as king of Tai with his capital at Chin-yang.

春，淮阴侯韩信谋反关中，夷三族。
这年的春天，淮阴侯韩信在关中谋反，被夷灭三族。
In the spring Han Hsin, the marquis of Huai-yin, plotted a revolt in the area within the Pass. He was executed with his three sets of relatives.

夏，梁王彭越谋反，废迁蜀；复欲反，遂夷三族。
夏天，梁王彭越谋反，废掉了他的王位，把他流放到蜀地；不久他又想谋反，被夷灭三族。
In the summer P'eng Yueh, the king of Liang, plotted a revolt. He was removed from his position and exiled to Shu but, when it was found that he was once more scheming to revolt, he was executed with his three sets of relatives.

立子恢为梁王，子友为淮阳王。
高祖就立皇子刘恢为梁王，皇子刘友为淮阳王。
Kao-tsu set up his son Liu Hui as king of Liang and his son Liu Yu as king of Huai-yang.

秋七月，淮南王黥布反，东并荆王刘贾地，北渡淮，楚王交走入薛。
秋季七月，淮南王黥布造反，向东吞并了荆王刘贾的地盘，又北渡淮河，楚王刘交被迫逃到薛国。
In autumn, the seventh month, Ching Pu, the king of Huai-nan, revolted, seized the land of Liu Chia, the king of Ching, to the east and marched north across the Huai River. Liu Chiao, the king of Ch'u, fled to Hsieh.

高祖自往击之。立子长为淮南王。
高祖亲自率军前去讨伐。立皇子刘长为淮南王。
Kao-tsu in person led a force to attack Ching Pu, setting up his son Liu Ch'ang as king of Huai-nan.

十二年，十月，高祖已击布军会甀，布走，令别将追之。
十二年(前195)十月，高祖在会甀击败了黥布的军队，黥布逃走，高祖派别将继续追击。
In the tenth month of the twelfth year [195 B.C.] Kao-tsu had already attacked Ching Pu's army at Kuei-chui, and Ching Pu was in flight. Kao-tsu dispatched a special general to pursue him.

高祖还归，过沛，留。
高祖回京途中，路过沛县时停留下来。
while he himself started back to the capital, passing through his old home of Pei on his way. Here he stopped.

置酒沛宫，悉召故人父老子弟纵酒。
在沛宫置备酒席，把老朋友和父老子弟都请来一起纵情畅饮。
and held a feast at the palace of Pei, summoning all his old friends and the elders and young men to drink to their hearts' content.

发沛中儿得百二十人，教之歌。
挑选沛中儿童一百二十人，教他们唱歌。
He gathered together a group of some hundred and twenty children of Pei and taught them to sing.

酒酣，高祖击筑，自为歌诗曰：“大风起兮云飞扬，威加海内兮归故乡，安得猛士兮守四方！”
酒喝得正痛快时，高祖自己弹击着筑琴，唱起自己编的歌：“大风刮起来啊云彩飞扬，声威遍海内啊回归故乡，怎能得到猛士啊守卫四方！”
and when the feast was at its height, Kao-tsu struck the lute and sang a song which he had composed: A great wind came forth; The clouds rose on high. Now that my might rules all within the seas, I have returned to my old village. Where shall I find brave men To guard the four corners of my land?

令儿皆和习之。
让儿童们跟着学唱。
He made the children join in and repeat the song.

高祖乃起舞，慷慨伤怀，泣数行下。
于是高祖起舞，情绪激动心中感伤，洒下行行热泪。
while he rose and danced. Deeply moved with grief and nostalgia, and with tears streaming down his face.

谓沛父兄曰：“游子悲故乡。”
高祖对沛县父老兄弟说：“远游的赤子总是思念着故乡。”
he said to the elders of Pei, "The traveler sighs for his old home."

吾虽都关中，万岁后吾魂魄犹乐思沛。
我虽然建都关中，但是将来死后我的魂魄还会喜欢和思念故乡。
"Though I have made my capital within the Pass, after I have departed this life my spirit will still think with joy of Pei."

且朕自沛公以诛暴逆，遂有天下。
而且我开始是以沛公的身份起兵讨伐暴逆，终于取得天下。
"From the time when I was governor of Pei, I went forth to punish the wicked and violent until at last the whole world is mine."

其以沛为朕汤沐邑，复其民，世世无有所与。
我把沛县作为我的汤沐邑，免除沛县百姓的赋税徭役，世世代代不必纳税服役。
"It is my wish that Pei become my bath-town. I hereby exempt its people from all taxes. For generation after generation, nothing more shall be required of you."

沛父兄诸母故人日乐饮极欢，道旧故为笑乐。
沛县的父老兄弟及同宗婶子大娘亲戚朋友天天快活饮酒，尽情欢宴，叙谈往事，取笑作乐。
Then for over ten days the old men and women and Kao-tsu's former friends of Pei spent each day drinking and rejoicing, reminiscing and joking about old times.

十余日，高祖欲去，沛父兄固请留高祖。
过了十多天，高祖要走了，沛县父老坚决要高祖多留几日。
When Kao-tsu made ready to leave, the men of Pei all begged him to stay a little longer.

高祖曰：“吾人众多，父兄不能给。”乃去。
高祖说：“我的随从人众太多，父兄们供应不起。”于是离开沛县。
Kao-tsu replied, "My retinue is very large and I fear it would be too much for you to supply them with food any longer," and with this he departed.

沛中空县皆之邑西献。
这天，沛县城里全空了，百姓都赶到城西来敬献牛、酒等礼物。
The entire district of Pei became deserted as everyone flocked to the western edge of the city to present parting gifts.

高祖复留止，张饮三日。
高祖又停下来，搭起帐篷，痛饮三天。
Kao-tsu again halted his progress, set up tents, and drank for three days more.

沛父兄皆顿首曰：“沛幸得复，丰未复，唯陛下哀怜之。”
沛县父老都叩头请求说：“沛县有幸得以免除赋税徭役，丰邑却没有免除，希望陛下可怜他们。”
The elders of Pei all bowed their heads and said, "Pei has been fortunate enough to have its taxes revoked, but the city of Feng has not been so blessed. We beg that Your Majesty will take pity upon it as well."

高祖曰：“丰吾所生长，极不忘耳，吾特为其以雍齿故反我为魏。”
高祖说：“丰邑是我生长的地方，我最不能忘，我只是因为当初丰邑人跟着雍齿反叛我而帮助魏王才这样的。”
"Feng is the place where I was born and grew up," replied Kao-tsu. "It least of all could I ever forget. It is only that I remember how under Yung Chih it turned against me and joined Wei."

沛父兄固请，乃并复丰，比沛。
沛县父老仍旧坚决请求，高祖才答应把丰邑的赋税徭役也免除掉，跟沛县一样。
But the elders of Pei continued to plead with him until he finally agreed to absolve Feng from its taxes in the same manner as Pei.

于是拜沛侯刘濞为吴王。
于是封沛侯刘濞为吴王。
He then transferred the marquis of Pei, Liu Pi, to the position of king of Wu.

汉将别击布军洮水南北，皆大破之，追得斩布鄱阳。
汉将军在洮水南北分别进击黥布，全部打败了叛军，追到鄱阳抓获了黥布，把他斩了。
The Han generals made separate attacks upon Ch'ing Pu's armies north and south of the T'ao River, defeating them all, and pursued and executed Ch'ing Pu at P'o-yang.

樊哙别将兵定代，斩陈豨当城。
樊哙另外带兵平定了代地，在当城杀了陈豨。
Fan K'uai in the meantime led the troops under his command in pacifying the region of Tai and executed Ch'en Hsi at Tang-ch'eng.

十一月，高祖自布军至长安。
十一月，高祖从讨伐黥布的军中返回长安。
In the eleventh month Kao-tsu returned from his campaign against Ching Pu to the capital at Chang-an.

十二月，高祖曰：“秦始皇帝、楚隐王陈涉、魏安釐王、齐缗王、赵悼襄王皆绝无后，予守冢各十家，秦皇帝二十家，魏公子无忌五家。”
十二月，高祖说：“秦始皇、楚隐王陈涉、魏安釐王、齐缗王、赵悼襄王等都没有后代，分别给予守墓人十户，给秦始皇二十户，给魏公子无忌五户。”
In the twelfth month Kao-tsu announced: "The First Emperor of Chin, King Yin of Ch'u (Ch'en She), King An-li of Wei, King Min of Chi, and King Tao-hsiang of Chao are all without surviving heirs. I hereby establish ten families for each to act as guardians of their graves, except that the First Emperor of Chin shall be granted twenty families. In addition the nobleman Wu-chi of Wei shall be granted five families."

赦代地吏民为陈豨、赵利所劫掠者，皆赦之。
代地的官吏、百姓，凡是被陈豨、赵利所劫持的，全部赦免。
He also granted pardon to the region of Tai and to all the people and officials who had been robbed and plundered by Ch'en Hsi and Chao Li.

陈豨降将言豨反时，燕王卢绾使人之豨所，与阴谋。
陈豨的降将说，陈豨造反时，燕王卢绾曾经派人到陈豨那里跟他密谋。
One of Ch'en Hsi's generals who had surrendered reported to Kao-tsu that, at the time when Ch'en Hsi revolted, Lu Wan, the king of Yen, had sent an envoy to Ch'en Hsi to join in plotting with him.

上使辟阳侯迎绾，绾称病。
高祖派辟阳侯审食其召卢绾进京，卢绾推说有病不来。
The emperor sent Shen I-chi, the marquis of Pi-yang, to fetch Lu Wan, but Lu Wan pleaded illness and declined to go with him.

辟阳侯归，具言绾反有端矣。
辟阳侯回来后，详细报告说卢绾谋反，事有端绪。
Shen I-chi returned and reported on his mission, declaring that there seemed to be some basis for the report of Lu Wan's disaffection.

二月，使樊哙、周勃将兵击燕王绾。
二月，高祖派樊哙、周勃带兵讨伐燕王卢绾。
In the second month the emperor dispatched Fan K'uai and Chou Po to lead a force of soldiers and attack Lu Wan.

赦燕吏民与反者。立皇子建为燕王。
赦免了燕地参与造反的官吏与百姓。立皇子刘建为燕王。
He issued a proclamation freeing all the officials and people of Yen from responsibility for the revolt, and set up his son Liu Chien as the new king of Yen.

高祖击布时，为流矢所中，行道病。
高祖讨伐黥布的时候，被飞箭射中，在回来的路上生了病。
When Kao-tsu was fighting against Ching Pu, he was wounded by a stray arrow and on the way back he fell ill.

病甚，吕后迎良医。
病得很厉害，吕后为他请来了一位好医生。
When his illness continued to grow worse, Empress Lu sent for a skilled doctor.

医入见，高祖问医。医曰：“病可治。”
医生进宫拜见，高祖问医生病情如何。医生说：“可以治好。”
The doctor examined Kao-tsu and, in answer to his question, replied, "This illness can be cured."

于是高祖嫚骂之曰：“吾以布衣提三尺剑取天下，此非天命乎？”
于是高祖骂他说：“就凭我一个平民，手提三尺之剑，最终取得天下，这不是由于天命吗？”
With this, Kao-tsu began to berate and curse him, saying, "I began as a commoner and with my three-foot sword conquered the world. Was this not the will of Heaven?"

命乃在天，虽扁鹊何益！”
人的命运决定于上天，纵然你是扁鹊，又有什么用处呢！”
"My fate lies with Heaven. Even Pien Ch'ieh, the most famous doctor of antiquity, could do nothing for me!"

遂不使治病，赐金五十斤罢之。
说完并不让他治病，赏给他五十斤黄金打发走了。
In the end he would not let the doctor treat his illness, but gave him fifty catties of gold and sent him away.

已而吕后问：“陛下百岁后，萧相国即死，令谁代之？”
不久，吕后问高祖：“陛下百年之后，如果萧相国也死了，让谁来接替他做相国呢？”
When the doctor had gone, Empress Lu asked, "After my lord's allotted years have run out, if Prime Minister Hsiao Ho should die, who could be appointed to fill his place?"

上曰：“曹参可。”
高祖说：“曹参可以。”
"Ts'an will do," replied the emperor.

问其次，上曰：“王陵可。然陵少戆，陈平可以助之。”
又问曹参以后的事，高祖说：“王陵可以。不过他略显迂愚刚直，陈平可以帮助他。”
"And after him?" the empress asked. "Wang Ling will do," he replied. "But Wang Ling is rather stupid. He will need Ch'en Ping to help him."

陈平智有余，然难以独任。
陈平智慧有余，然而难以独自担当重任。
"Ch'en Ping has more than enough brains but he could hardly be entrusted with the position alone."

周勃重厚少文，然安刘氏者必勃也，可令为太尉。”
周勃深沉厚道，缺少文才，但是安定刘氏天下的一定是周勃，可以让他担任太尉。”
"Chou Po has dignity and generosity, though he lacks learning. Yet it will be Chou Po who will look out for the welfare of the Liu family. He deserves to be made grand commandant."

吕后复问其次，上曰：“此后亦非而所知也。”
吕后再问以后的事，高祖说：“再以后的事，也就不是你所能知道的了。”
"And who after him?" the empress asked again. "After all these men are gone," he replied, "you will no longer be here to know about it."

卢绾与数千骑居塞下候伺，幸上病愈自入谢。
卢绾带着几千骑兵在边境上等待机会，希望在高祖病愈以后，亲自到长安去请罪。
Lu Wan, with a force of several thousand cavalry, proceeded to a spot along the border, sending to inquire whether the emperor's condition had improved so that he might be allowed to come to the capital and apologize for his disaffection.

四月甲辰，高祖崩长乐宫。
四月甲辰日，高祖在长乐宫逝世。
In the fourth month, the day chia-ch'en [June 1, 195 B.C.], Kao-tsu passed away in the Palace of Lasting Joy.

四日不发丧。吕后与审食其谋曰：“诸将与帝为编户民，今北面为臣，此常怏怏，今乃事少主，非尽族是，天下不安。”
过了四天还不发布丧事消息。吕后和审食其商量说：“那些将领先前和皇帝同是登记在册的平民百姓，后来北面称臣，这些人就常常流露出不满意不服气的样子，现在又要侍奉年轻的新皇帝了，如果不全部族灭他们，天下就安定不了。”
Four days went by, but no mourning was announced. Empress Lu consulted with Shen I-chi saying, "The other leaders, like the emperor himself, all made their way up from the ranks of the common people. At present they face north and acknowledge themselves his subjects, but in their hearts they nurse a constant discontent. Now they will be called upon to serve a young master. I fear that, if they and their families are not completely done away with, there will be no peace for the empire!"

人或闻之，语郦将军。
有人听到了这个话，告诉了将军郦商。
Someone overheard these words and reported them to General Li Shang.

郦将军往见审食其，曰：“吾闻帝已崩，四日不发丧，欲诛诸将。诚如此，天下危矣。”
郦将军去见审食其，说：“我听说皇帝已驾崩四天了还不发布丧事消息，而且要杀掉所有的将领。如果真的这样做，天下可就危险了。”
The general went to visit Shen I-chi and said, "I have heard that the emperor passed away four days ago, but no mourning has yet been announced. I also understand that there are plans for executing all the present leaders. If this is actually carried out, I fear the empire will be in grave peril."

陈平、灌婴将十万守荥阳，樊哙、周勃将二十万定燕、代，此闻帝崩，诸将皆诛，必连兵还乡以攻关中，大臣内叛，诸侯外反，亡可翘足而待也。”
陈平、灌婴率领十万大军镇守荥阳，樊哙、周勃率领二十万大军平定燕地和代地，如果他们听说皇帝驾崩了，诸将都将遭杀戮，必定把军队联合在一起，回过头来进攻关中。那时候大臣们在朝廷叛乱，诸侯们在外面造反，覆亡的日子就举足可待了。”
"Ch'en Ping and Kuan Ying with a force of a hundred thousand are guarding Jung-yang, while Fan K'uai and Chou Po with two hundred thousand men are engaged in pacifying Yen and Tai. If they hear that the emperor has passed away and that all the leaders in the capital have been executed, they will surely lead their troops back in this direction and attack the area within the Pass. With the major officials in the capital in revolt and the feudal lords beyond up in arms, we may look for total defeat in a matter of days."

审食其人言之，乃以丁未发丧，大赦天下。
审食其进宫把这告诉了吕后，于是就在丁未日发布高祖逝世的消息，大赦天下。
Shen I-chi returned to the palace and reported these words to the empress. Accordingly, on the day ting-wei [June 4, 195 B.C.] mourning was proclaimed for the emperor and a general amnesty granted to the empire.

卢绾闻高祖崩，遂亡入匈奴。
卢绾听说高祖驾崩的消息，就逃到匈奴去了。
When Lu Wan received word of the emperor's passing, he fled from the country and joined the Hsiung-nu.

丙寅，葬。己巳，立太子，至太上皇庙。
丙寅日，安葬皇帝。己巳日，立太子，太子来到太上皇庙。
On the day ping-yin [June 21] of the fifth month the emperor was buried at Ch'ang-ling. On the day chi-ssu [June 26] the heir apparent was set up. He proceeded to the funerary temple of his grandfather, the Grand Supreme Emperor.

群臣皆曰：“高祖起徽细，拨乱世反之正，平定天下，为汉太祖，功最高。”
大臣们都说：“高祖起事于平民，平治乱世，使之归于正道，平定了天下，是汉朝的开国皇帝，功劳最高。”
where the assembled officials announced: "Kao-tsu rose from the humblest beginnings to correct a discordant age and turn it back to the right. He brought peace and order to the world and became the founder of the Han. His merit was of the most exalted order."

上尊号为高皇帝。
献上尊号称为高皇帝。
"and it is therefore appropriate that we should honor him with the title of 'Exalted Supreme Emperor.'"

太子袭号为皇帝，孝惠帝也。
太子继承皇帝之号，就是孝惠帝。
"The heir apparent succeeded to the title of Supreme Emperor; he is known posthumously as Emperor Hui the Filial."

令郡国诸将各立高祖庙，以岁时祠。
又下令让各郡国诸侯都建高祖庙，每年按时祭祀。
He gave orders that the feudal lords in each province and kingdom should set up funerary temples to Kao-tsu and perform sacrifices in them at the appropriate seasons of the year.

及孝惠五年，思高祖之悲乐沛，以沛宫为高祖原庙。
到孝惠帝五年(前190)，皇上想到高祖生前思念和喜欢沛县，就把沛宫定为高祖的原庙。
In the fifth year of his reign Emperor Hui, recalling how Kao-tsu had rejoiced and sorrowed on his last visit to Pei, had the palace of Pei made into a funerary temple for Kao-tsu, ranking second only to the main temple in the capital.

高祖所教歌儿百二十人，皆令为吹乐，后有缺，辄补之。
高祖所教过唱歌的儿童一百二十人，都让他们在原庙奏乐唱歌，以后有了缺员，就随时加以补充。
The hundred and twenty children whom Kao-tsu had taught to sing he ordered to perform the song to the accompaniment of wind instruments, and when any of the group later dropped out he had them immediately replaced.

高帝八男：长庶齐悼惠王肥；次孝惠，吕后子；次戚夫人子赵隐王如意；次代王恒，已立为孝文帝，薄太后子；次梁王恢，吕太后时徙为赵共王；次淮阳王友，吕太后时徙为赵幽王；次淮南厉王长；次燕王建。
高祖有八个儿子：庶出的长子是齐悼惠王刘肥；次子孝惠皇帝，是吕后的儿子；三子是戚夫人的儿子赵隐王如意；四子代王刘恒，后来被立为孝文皇帝，是薄太后的儿子；五子梁王刘恢，吕太后当政时被改封为赵共王；六子淮阳王刘友，吕太后时被改封为赵幽王；七子是淮南厉王刘长；八子是燕王刘建。
Kao-tsu had eight sons. The oldest, a son by a concubine, was Fei, the king of Chi, posthumously titled King Tao-hui. The second, a son by Empress Lu, became Emperor Hui. The third, son of Lady Chi, was Jui, the king of Chao, posthumously titled King Yin. The fourth was Heng, the king of Tai, who later became Emperor Wen the Filial; he was a son of Empress Dowager Po. The fifth was Hui, the king of Liang, who in the reign of Empress Lu was transferred to the position of king of Chao; he was given the posthumous title of King Kung. The sixth was Yu, the king of Huai-yang, whom Empress Lu made the king of Chao; his posthumous title was King Yu. The seventh was Ch'ang, who became King Li of Huai-nan, and the eighth was Chien, the king of Yen.

太史公曰：夏之政忠。忠之敝，小人以野，故殷人承之以敬。
太史公说：夏朝的政治忠厚。忠厚的弊病是使得百姓粗野少礼，所以殷朝代之以恭敬。
The Grand Historian remarks: The government of the Hsia dynasty was marked by good faith, which in time deteriorated until mean men had turned it into rusticity. Therefore the men of Shang who succeeded to the Hsia reformed this defect through the virtue of piety.

敬之敝，小人以鬼，故周人承之以文。
恭敬的弊病是使得百姓相信鬼神，所以周朝代之以礼仪。
But piety degenerated until mean men had made it a superstitious concern for the spirits. Therefore the men of Chou who followed corrected this fault through refinement and order.

文之敝，小人以僿，故救僿莫若以忠。
礼仪的弊病是使百姓不诚恳。所以要救治不诚恳的弊病，就没有什么比得上忠厚。
But refinement again deteriorated until it became in the hands of the mean a mere hollow show. Therefore what was needed to reform this hollow show was a return to good faith.

三王之道若循环，终而复始。
由此看来，夏、殷、周三代开国君主的治国之道好象是循着圆圈转，终而复始。
for the way of the Three Dynasties of old is like a cycle which, when it ends, must begin over again.

周、秦之间，可谓文敝矣。秦政不改，反酷刑法，岂不缪乎？
至于周朝到秦朝之间，其弊病可以说就在于过分讲究礼仪了。秦朝的政治不但没有改变这种弊病，反而使刑法更加残酷，难道不是很错误吗？
It is obvious that in late Chou and Chin times the earlier refinement and order had deteriorated. But the government of Chin failed to correct this fault, instead adding its own harsh punishments and laws. Was this not a grave error?

