殷契，母曰简狄，有娥氏之女，为帝喾次妃。
殷朝的始祖名契，他的母亲叫简狄，是有娥氏的女儿，帝喾的次妃。
Qi of Yin's mother was Jian Di, who was one of the daughters of Yousong and the secondary wife of Emperor Ku.

三人行浴，见玄鸟堕其卵，简狄取吞之，因孕生契。
有一天，简狄与两个伙伴在河边沐浴，见燕子生下一个卵，简狄就捡起来把它吃了，于是怀孕生下了契。
She was going with her two sisters to bathe, when she saw a dark bird drop its egg. Jian Di picked it up, and swallowed it, and thus being with child gave birth to Qi.

契长而佐禹治水有功。
契长大后，佐大禹治水有功。
When Qi grew up, he was succeseful in assisting Yu to control the flood.

帝舜乃命契曰：“百姓不亲，五品不训，汝为司徒而敬敷五教，五教在宽。”
舜对他说：“现在百官的关系不够和睦，家庭中的伦理关系也不和顺，你去担任司徒，去向人们进行孝、友、慈、恭、义五种教育，总的精神是以宽厚为宜。”
and the Emperor Shun, directing Qi, said: The people are wanting in affection for one another, and do not observe the five orders of relationship. You, as Minister of Instruction, should reverently inculcate the lessons of duty belonging to those five orders, but do so with gentleness.

封于商，赐姓子氏。
契被封在商地，赐姓子氏。
He held in fief the principality of Shang, and was given the surname of Zi (son).

契兴于唐、虞、大禹之际，功业著于百姓，百姓以平。
契所在的氏族在尧、舜、禹期间发展起来，作为一个氏族首领，契的功业卓著，百姓的生活很安定。
Qi flourished in the reigns of Yao, Shun, and the great Yu. His services were manifest to the people, who were accordingly at peace.

契卒，子昭明立。
契去世后，子昭明继位。
Qi (documents) died, and his son Zhaoming (luminous) succeeded him.

昭明卒，子相土立。
昭明去世后，子相土继位。
Zhaoming died, and his son Xiangtu (view land) succeeded him.

相土卒，子昌若立。
相土去世后，子昌若继位。
Xiangtu died, and his son Chang Ruo (bright-like) succeeded him.

昌若卒，子曹圉立。
昌若去世后，子曹圉继位。
Chang Ruo died, and his son Cao Yu (cattle-pens) succeeded him.

曹圉卒，子冥立。
曹圉去世后，子冥继位。
Cao Yu died, and his son Ming (obscure) succeeded him.

冥卒，子振立。
冥去世后，子振继位。
Ming died, and his son Zhen (shake) succeeded him.

振卒，子微立。
振去世后，子微继位。
Zhen died, and his son Wei (diminutive) succeeded him.

微卒，子报丁立。
微去世后，子报丁继位。
Wei died, and his son Baoding (report D) succeeded him.

报丁卒，子报乙立。
报丁去世后，子报乙继位。
Baoding died, and his son Baoyi (report B) succeeded him.

报乙卒，子报丙立。
报乙去世后，子报丙继位。
Baoyi died, and his son Baobing (report C) succeeded him.

报丙卒，子主壬立。
报丙去世后，子主壬继位。
Baobing died, and his son Zhuren (lord I) succeeded him.

主壬卒，子主癸立。
主壬去世后，子主癸继位。
Zhuren died, and his son Zhu gui (lord J) succeeded him.

主癸卒，子天乙立，是为成汤。
主癸去世后，子天乙继位，这就是成汤。
Zhu Gui died, and his son Tian Yi (Heaven B) or Tang the Completer succeeded him.

成汤。自契至汤八迁。
成汤，从契到成汤经过八次迁都。
From Qi to Tang the Completer there were eight changes of the capital.

汤始居亳，从先王居,作《帝诰》。
汤建都在毫邑，回到其祖先建都的地方，为此他作了《帝诰》。
Tang at first dwelt in Bo, choosing the residence of the first king, and the 'Emperor's Announcement' was written.

汤征诸侯。葛伯不祀,汤始伐之。
汤作为诸侯之长，受命征讨不从王命的诸侯。葛国之君不守祭祀之礼，汤对他进行讨伐。
When Tang made an expedition against the princes, the chief of Ge was not offering the proper sacrifices, and Tang began by punishing him.

汤曰：“予有言:人视水见形，视民知治不。”
成汤说：“我说过，人从水中可以照见自己的容貌，从众人的反应中可以得知政治是否清明。”
Tang said: 'I observe that if a man looks at the water he sees his reflection; if he seeks to make an impression on the people, should he not know how to govern?'

伊尹曰：“明哉!言能听，道乃进。君国子民，为善者皆在王官。勉哉四，勉哉!”
伊尹说：“这话说得很好，能听取百官的意见，帝王的管理水平才能提高。要治好国家，管好黎民，就得让能办事的人都各在其位。努力呀，努力呀!”
Yiyin said: 'That is clear! If you say that you will listen to reason you may offer yourself as ruler of the State. Whether the people do right or not depends entirely on the king and his ministers. Rouse yourself to action!'

汤曰：“汝不能敬命,予大罚殛之,无有攸赦。”作《汤征》。
成汤说：“如果你们有不奉公守法的行为，我就要狠狠的处置，决不宽恕。”于是作了《汤征》一篇，以记载此次征伐的事情。
Tang said: 'If you cannot respect my commands, I will inflict upon you the extreme penalty death. You will not obtain forgiveness.' The punitive expedition of Tang was written.

伊尹名阿衡。
伊尹又称阿衡。
Yiyin's name was A-Heng.

阿衡欲奸汤而无由,乃为有莘氏媵臣,负鼎俎，以滋味说汤,致于王道。
早年微贱，他想见成汤却找不到机缘，于是就做了有莘氏的陪嫁奴，背着烹调用具，用做菜的道理比喻治国之道以说服成汤，协助成汤实现了王道的政治。
A-Heng wanted to meet Tang, but had no opportunity of doing so; he therefore became cook to the prince of Xin, and while bringing Tang dishes to taste urged him to perfect himself in the way of the ancient kings.

或曰，伊尹处士，汤使人聘迎之,五反然后肯往从汤，言素王及九主之事。
也有人说伊尹原是个隐士，成汤派人去请他出山，去了五次他才答应前来辅佐成汤。他向成汤讲了去繁就简、远古素王治理天下的原则以及九主成功的故事。
Some say that when Yiyin was living in retirement Tang sent five times to invite him to a meeting before he would obey him, and talk about matters connected with the guileless king and the nine rulers.

汤举任以国政。
汤破格重用伊尹，委伊尹以国政。
Tang promoted Ren to the administration of affairs.

伊尹去汤适夏。既丑有夏，复归于亳。
伊尹曾一度离开商汤去了夏都，但他不满意夏桀的腐败，又回到商的国都。
Yiyin went from Tang to Xia. Being indignant with the sovereign of Xia, he returned to Bo,

入自北门，遇女鸠、女房,作《女鸠》、《女房》。
他从北门进城时，遇到汤的两位贤臣女鸠、女房，于是伊尹作了《女鸠》、《女房》两篇。
and as he entered by the north gate met Rujiu and Rufang, and the 'Rujiu' and 'Rufang' were written.

汤出，见野张网四面，祝曰：“自天下四方皆入吾网。”
有一天，成汤出外打猎，见猎人围着猎场四面张网，猎人祝告说：“愿天下四方的鸟兽都落入我的网中。”
Tang went out and saw a rustic, who was spreading nets in every direction, and vowing that every bird in the sky should go into his net.

汤曰：“嘻,尽之矣!”乃去其三面，祝曰：“欲左，左。欲右，右。不用命，乃入吾网。”
成汤说：“咳，这岂不是一网打尽了么?”于是他下令把三面的网撤去，并将祷告辞改为：“想从左边走的，向左；想从右边走的，向右；不听指挥的，才落入我的罗网。”
Tang said, 'What! all?' Then, taking away the nets on three sides, he vowed that those which wanted to go to the left should go left, and those which wanted to go right should go right, and that only those which were the victims of fate should be caught in the net.

诸侯闻之，曰：“汤德至矣，及禽兽。”
诸侯知道后，说：“成汤的仁德是无以复加了，连禽兽都蒙受他的恩泽。”
The princes, hearing of it, said, 'Tang's kindness is extreme, and extends even to birds and beasts.'

当是时，夏桀为虐政淫荒，而诸侯昆吾氏为乱。
那时候，夏桀施行暴政，荒淫无道，诸侯中的昆吾氏也为非作歹。
At this time Jie of Xia was oppressive, and his rule dissipated, and one of the princes Kunwu rebelled,

汤乃兴师率诸侯，伊尹从汤，汤自把钺以伐昆吾，遂伐桀。
成汤于是兴兵，率诸侯讨伐昆吾氏，伊尹随汤出征。成汤持着象征权威的斧钺击败昆吾氏后，乘胜讨伐夏桀。
so Tang, levying an army, put himself at the head of the princes. Yiyin followed Tang, who, grasping a halberd, marched against Kunwu, and then attacked Jie.

汤曰：“格女众庶，来，女悉听朕言。匪台小子敢行举乱,有夏多罪,予维闻女众言,夏氏有罪。予畏上帝，不敢不正。今夏多罪，天命殛之。”
成汤对士兵们说：“你们全都过来，听我讲话。不是我敢于举兵造反，是因为夏桀罪大恶极。我是听你们大家都说夏王太坏，我怕上天怪罪，才不敢不起来征讨。夏王的罪恶太多，上天让我们诛灭他。”
Tang said: Come, ye multitudes of the people, listen ye all to my words. It is not I, the little child, who dare to raise a rebellion. The ruler of Xia has committed many crimes. I have indeed heard the words of you all, but the Xia ruler is an offender, and, as I fear the Supreme god, I dare not but punish him. Now, as the Xia ruler has committed many crimes, Heaven has charged me to destroy him.

今女有众，女曰：“我君不恤我众，舍我啬事而割政”。女其曰：“有罪，其奈何”?
你们大家也常说：“夏王不关心民众，不让我们从事农业生产，妨碍我们的正常活动。”也有人说：“夏王有罪，我们该对他怎么办?”
Now, ye multitudes, you are saying, 'Our sovereign does not compassionate us; he disregards our husbandry, and his government is a cruel one.' You say, 'As to his crimes, what remedy have we?'

夏王率止众力，率夺夏国。有众率怠不和，曰：“是日何时丧?予与女皆亡!”夏德若兹，今朕必往。
如今夏朝的君臣压制、掠夺黎民，弄得众叛亲离，致使人们恨恨地说：“这个暴君什么时候死呀，如果有那一天，我们情愿陪着他一块死!”夏王的德行已经恶劣到如此地步，我是一定要讨伐他的。
The king of Xia does nothing but exhaust his people's strength, and treat the kingdom of Xia oppressively. His people have all become idle, and are not in harmony with him, saying, 'When will this sun set? We shall all perish together.' Such being the conduct of the sovereign of Xia, I must advance.

尔尚及予一人致天之罚,予其大理女。女毋不信，朕不食言。
如果你们能和我顺着天意去讨伐夏桀，我将厚厚地赏赐你们，你们别不相信，我决不会说话不算数。
If you help me, the one man, to carry out the punishment decreed by Heaven, and I will greatly reward you. On no account disbelieve me. I will not retract my words.

女不从誓言,予则帑缪女,无有攸赦。
你们如果不听我的话，我就对你们连同你们的妻儿一起严加惩处，绝不饶恕。
If you do not carry out the words of my speech, I will put you and your children to death; you shall not be pardoned.

以告令师，作《汤誓》。
成汤把这番话通告全军，这就是《汤誓》。
This being announced to the army, the speech of Tang was written.

于是汤曰：“吾甚武”,号曰武王。
成汤说“我很勇武”，于是自己号称为武王。
Tang then said, 'I am very warlike'; and he was styled the 'warlike king.'

桀败于有娥之虚，桀奔于鸣条，夏师败绩。
夏桀在有娥氏的故地被打败了，逃到了鸣条，夏朝的军队被彻底消灭。
Jie was defeated in the wilds of Yousong, and fled to Mingtiao. The army of Xia being entirely defeated,

汤遂伐三燮，俘厥宝玉,义伯、仲伯作《典宝》。
成汤乘胜进攻三复，全部缴获了夏桀挟持的珍宝，于是成汤的大臣义伯、仲伯为此写作了《典宝》。
Tang smote Sanzong, where he captured the precious jewels. Yibo and Zhongbo wrote the 'Statutes and Jewels.'

汤既胜夏，欲迁其社，不可，作《夏社》。
成汤战胜夏桀后，想改换夏朝所祭祀的土神，但是改换不了，因而作了《夏社》。
When Tang had conquered Xia, he wished to remove the altars to the spirits of the land, but was unable to do so, and the 'Altar of Xia' was written.

伊尹报。于是诸侯毕服，汤乃践天子位，平定海内。
伊尹向各地诸侯发出通告，各地诸侯都表示归附商朝，于是成汤登上天子之位，天下得以平定。
Yiyin made a report, and the princes being satisfied, Tang ascended the Imperial throne, and tranquillized the country within the four seas.

汤归至于泰卷陶,中器作诰。
成汤班师回到泰卷后，大臣仲虺作了《仲虺之诰》。
When Tang returned he came to Taijuantao, and Zhonglei wrote his announcement.

既绌夏命，还亳，作《汤诰》:“维三月,王自至于东郊。告诸侯群后:‘毋不有功于民，勤力乃事。予乃大罚殛女,毋予怨。'”
成汤灭了夏朝后，回到亳都，遂作《汤诰》以告谕天下说：“这年三月，商王从东郊返回毫都，商王告诫各地诸侯与各国君主：‘你们必须多给黎民百姓作贡献，应当勤勤恳恳地做好你们的工作。要不然，我将重罚你们，到那时你们可别怨恨我。'”
Having made an end of the sovereignty of Xia, Tang returned to Bo and wrote the 'Announcement of Tang.' In the third month the king came himself to the eastern suburb and made the following announcement to the princes and nobles: 'If you do not perform meritorious service for the people and be diligent in your business, I shall inflict the extreme punishment of death. Do not murmur against me.'

曰：“古禹、皋陶久劳于外,其有功乎民，民乃有安。东为江，北为济，西为河，南为淮,四渎已修,万民乃有居。后稷降播,农殖百谷。三公咸有功于民，故后有立。昔蚩尤与其大夫作乱百姓，帝乃弗予,有状。先王言不可不勉。”
又说：“古时的大禹、皋陶在外奔波多年，他们为百姓立有大功，百姓才得安宁。他们在南面疏导大江，北面疏导济水，西面疏导黄河，东面疏导淮水；治好了这四条大河，百姓才得以安居。后稷发展农业，努力种植百谷。他们三位都有功于百姓，所以后代得以分封立国。而蚩尤与其大夫作乱，祸及百姓，上帝不保佑他，这是有据可考的。先王的榜样与反面的教训你们必须努力学习，认真汲取。”
He also said: 'Formerly Yu and Gaoyao laboured long in distant regions. They performed meritorious service for the people, who dwelt in peace. On the east there was the Great river, on the north the Ji, on the west the Yellow river, and on the south the Huai. These four streams were kept within bounds, and the people dwelt in safety. Prince Millet told them how to sow and cultivate the various kinds of grain. These three chiefs all performed meritorious service for the people, and were therefore ennobled. Formerly Chiyou and his officers raised a rebellion among the people but the [Yellow] Emperor disapproved, and his crimes were exposed. The words of the former kings cannot but rouse you to action.'

曰：“不道，毋之在国，女毋我怨。”以令诸侯。
最后又警告说：“行事无道就不能让他临国治民，到时你们可别怨恨我。”成汤以此明白地告诫诸侯，
If you are unprincipled you shall not rule in the State. 'Do not murmur against me.' Thus he directed the princes.

伊尹作《咸有一德》,咎单作《明居》。
伊尹为此作了《咸有一德》,咎单为此作了《明君》。
Yiyin wrote the book 'Both possessed pure Virtue,' and Jiudan wrote the 'Illustrious Abode.'

汤乃改正朔,易服色，上白,朝会以昼。
成汤于是实行新历法，又变换服饰，崇尚白色，群臣朝见帝王商议国事也定在白天。
Tang altered the day of the New Year, and changed the colour of the dresses, white being uniformly worn at State functions.

汤崩，太子太丁未立而卒，于是乃立太丁之弟外丙，是为帝外丙。
成汤去世后，汤的长子太丁尚未继位就死了，因而让太丁的弟弟外丙继位，这就是帝外丙。
After the demise of Tang his eldest son, Taiding (Great D), died before he could come to the throne; and so Taiding's younger brother Waibing (Outer C), that is Emperor Waibing, came to the throne.

帝外丙即位三年，崩，立外丙之弟中壬，是为帝中壬。
外丙即位三年后去世，由外丙之弟中壬继位，这就是帝中壬。
Emperor Waibing reigned three years, and died, and his brother Zhongren (Middle I), that is Emperor Zhongren, came to the throne.

帝中壬即位四年，崩，伊尹乃立太丁之子太甲。太甲，成汤適长孙也，是为帝太甲。
中壬即位四年后去世，伊尹就让太丁之子太甲继位，太甲是成汤的嫡长孙，这就是帝太甲。
Emperor Zhongren reigned four years, and died. Yiyin then set Taiding's son, Taijia (Great A), on the throne. He was Tang the Completer's eldest legitimate grandson. This was Emperor Taijia.

帝太甲元年，伊尹作《伊训》，作《肆命》，作《徂后》。
太甲元年，伊尹作《伊训》，作《肆命》，作《徂后》。
In the first year of Emperor Taijia, Yiyin wrote the 'Instructions of Yi,' the 'Declaration of the Appointment of Heaven,' and the 'Deceased Sovereign.'

帝太甲既立三年，不明，暴虐，不遵汤法，乱德，于是伊尹放之于桐宫。
帝太甲在位三年，昏庸暴虐，不遵守成汤定下的制度，德行丑恶，伊尹便把他废黜，放逐到桐宫。
After Emperor Taijia had been on the throne three years, he proved unintelligent and cruel. He did not obey Tang's laws, and his conduct was disorderly, so Yiyin placed him in the Dryandra (palace).

伊尹摄行政当国，以朝诸侯。
这期间，伊尹代替太甲治理国事，接受诸侯的朝见。
For three years Yiyin administered the government, and as ruler of the State gave audience to the nobles.

帝太甲居桐宫三年，悔过自责，反善，于是伊尹乃迎帝太甲而授之政。
太甲在桐宫住了三年，他悔过自省，改恶从善，伊尹便将他接了回来，把政权交还给他。
After the Emperor Taijia had dwelt in the Dryandra palace for three years, he repented of his errors, blamed himself, and amended his ways. Whereupon Yiyin met the Emperor Taijia and resigned to him the reins of government.

帝太甲修德，诸侯咸归殷，百姓以宁。
太甲经过修炼提高了道德，诸侯对他表示归附，百姓的生活也都很安宁。
Emperor Taijia became virtuous, the princes all returned to the Yin capital, and the people were tranquil.

伊尹嘉之，乃作《太甲训》三篇，褒帝太甲，称太宗。
为嘉奖太甲的错而能改，伊尹作了《太甲训》三篇，并且褒扬太甲，称他为“太宗”。
Yiyin praised him, and wrote the 'Instructions to Taijia' in three books. Commending Emperor Taijia, he honoured him with the title of 'Great Master.'

帝小乙崩，子帝武丁立。
小乙死后，其子武丁继位。
Emperor Xiaoyi died, and his son Emperor Wuding (Martial D) came to the throne.

帝武丁即位，思复兴殷，而未得其佐。
武丁即位后，想重新振兴殷朝，但未物色到得力的佐臣。
When Emperor Wuding was on the throne, he pondered how the Yin dynasty could be revivified, but as he had not obtained an assistant.

三年不言，政事决定于冢宰，以观国风。
于是三年之内他不动声色，把政务交给太宰自己则下去考察民情。
he did not speak for three years, government affairs having to be conducted by the prime minister, who examined into the customs of the country.

武丁夜梦得圣人，名曰说。
武丁夜里梦见一位名叫“说”的能人。
Wuding dreamed one night that he had found a holy man named Yue.

以梦所见视群臣百吏，皆非也。
他按照梦中所见的样子观察群臣百官，没有像的。
and, in order that he might secure the man he had seen in his dream, he passed under review his officers and ministers of State, but not one of them was the right man.

于是乃使百工营求之野，得说于傅险中。
于是他就派人到民间寻找，结果在傅险这个地方找到了。
He then made all his officers search for him in the wilds, and Yue was discovered at the crag of Fu.

是时说为胥靡，筑于傅险。
当时那个叫“说”的人是个苦役犯，正在傅险修路。
At this time Yue was a clerk, not a builder at the crag of Fu.

见于武丁，武丁曰是也。
找到他的人带他去见武丁，武丁说就是他。
He had an audience of Wuding, who said, 'That is the right man.'

得而与之语，果圣人，举以为相，殷国大治。
武丁把他留下，和他谈话，果然是个有能力有学问的人。武丁破格任用他为宰相，殷朝被他治理得很有起色。
Having talked with him, and finding that he really was a holy man, Wuding promoted him to be his prime minister. The kingdom of Yin was well governed in consequence.

故遂以傅险姓之，号曰傅说。
于是武丁就将傅险作为他的姓氏，称他为傅说。
and he was named after the crag of Fu, being called Fu Yue.

帝武丁祭成汤，明日，有飞雉登鼎耳而响，武丁惧。
武丁到祖庙祭祀成汤的第二天，有只野鸡飞在鼎耳上咕咕叫，武丁感到不吉祥。
Wuding was sacrificing to Tang the Completer the next day, when a pheasant flew up, lighted on the ear of a tripod, and crowed. Wuding was alarmed.

祖己曰：“王勿忧，先修政事。”
祖己说：“大王不必担忧，您只管把国事办好。”
but Zuji (Ancestor F) said the king should not be anxious; he must first rectify the administration of affairs.

祖己乃训王曰：“唯天监下，典厥义，降年有永有不永，非天夭民，中绝其命。”
接着祖己就告诉武丁说：“上天在监督人们，审视着人们的一言一行是否合乎正义。上天赋予人们的寿命有长有短，并非成心让谁半道夭折。”
Zuji accordingly lectured the king, saying, 'In its superintendence over men below, Heaven pays special regard to their proper behaviour, and bestows on them accordingly length of years or the reverse. Heaven does not cut short men's lives; they bring them to an end themselves.'

民有不若德，不听罪，天既附命正厥德，乃曰“其奈何”。
有人不按道德行事，有错不改正，等上天果真根据他的实际表现决定了他的寿命长短时，那时他再说“怎么办”也是没有用处的。
Some men may not have conformed to virtue, and will not acknowledge their crimes; Heaven then charges them to correct their conduct, but they say, 'What shall we do?'

呜呼！王嗣敬民，罔非天继，常祀毋礼于弃道。
您就只管尽心尽力地为百姓做好事，任何一个人都是上天的后代，您只注意在祭祀时不要失礼、不要背道，此外您就不用怕再有什么灾难降临。
Ah! the king should continuously treat the people with respect. Are they not Heaven's descendants? Be constant in sacrificing, and do not worship with the rites of a discarded religion.'

武丁修政行德，天下咸欢，殷道复兴。
于是武丁从此修明政治，施行仁德，天下臣民无不欢悦，殷朝的国运又重新昌盛起来。
Wuding instituted a government reform, and practised virtue. The whole nation rejoiced, and the fortunes of Yin again flourished.

太宗崩，子沃丁立。
太宗去世后，子沃丁继位。
'Great Master' died, and his son Woding (Glossy D) came to the throne.

帝沃丁之时，伊尹卒。
沃丁为帝时，伊尹去世。
In Emperor Woding's reign, Yiyin died.

既葬伊尹于亳,咎单遂训伊尹事，作《沃丁》。
人们把伊尹葬在了亳都，大臣咎单为阐明伊尹的生平功德，作了《沃丁》。
When they had buried Yiyin at Bo, Jiu Dan set forth as lessons the doings of Yiyin; and the 'Woding' was written.

沃丁崩，弟太庚立,是为帝太庚。
沃丁去世后，其弟太庚继位，这就是帝太庚。
Wuting died, and his brother Taigeng (Great G), that is Emperor Taigeng, came to the throne.

帝太庚崩，子帝小甲立。
太庚去世后，太庚之子小甲继位。
Emperor Taigeng died, and his son Emperor Xiaojia (Little A) came to the throne.

帝小甲崩，弟雍己立,是为帝雍己。
小甲去世后，其弟雍己继位，这就是帝雍己。
Emperor Xiaojia died, and his brother Yongji (Harmonious F), that is Emperor Yongji, came to the throne.

殷道衰，诸侯或不至。
这时，商朝的国力渐弱，诸侯有的不来朝拜。
The influence of the Yin dynasty beginning to decline, the princes occasionally neglected to come to court.

帝雍己崩，弟太戊立,是为帝太戊。
雍己去世后，其弟太戊继位，这就是帝太戊。
Emperor Yongji died, and his brother Taiwu (Great E), that is Emperor Taiwu, came to the throne.

帝太戊立伊陟为相。
太戊任用贤臣伊陟为相。
In his reign Yizhi became prime minister,

亳有祥桑榖共生于朝,一暮大拱。
当时亳都发生了一棵桑树和一棵楮树连生在一起的怪现象，而且一夜就长得有两手相围那么粗。
when there were omens in Bo, for a mulberry tree and a stalk of grain grew up together in the court. They attained full size in one evening,

帝太戊惧，问伊陟。
太戊感到恐惧，向伊陟请教。
and Emperor Taiwu, being alarmed, questioned Yizhi on the subject.

伊陟曰：“臣闻妖不胜德，帝之政其有阙与?帝其修德。”
伊陟就说：“妖魔鬼怪是战胜不了德行的，莫非是你在行政上有了什么不周到的地方?请你注意多行善事。”
Yizhi said: 'I, your servant, have heard that virtue is not overcome by evil omens. There may be defects in your Majesty's government, but let your Majesty cultivate virtue.'

太戊从之，而祥桑枯死而去。
太戊接受了伊陟的劝告，果然那棵连生的怪树很快就死掉了。
Taiwu followed his advice, and the ominous mulberry withered away.

伊陟赞言于巫咸,巫咸治王家有成，作《咸艾》,作《太戊》。
伊陟对大臣巫咸非常称道，因为他将帝王的家庭事务管理得非常好，所以为之作了《咸艾》和《太戊》。
Yizhi consulted with Xian the wizard, who governed the king's household admirably, and wrote the 'Xian-ai' and the 'Taiwu.'

帝太戊赞伊陟于庙,言弗臣，伊陟让，作《原命》。
太戊在祭祀宗庙时向祖先赞扬伊陟的功德，并且说将不把他当作臣子对待。伊陟推辞表示不敢当，因而作了《原命》。
Emperor Taiwu spoke on the subject with Yizhi in court, and said he was disloyal. Yizhi gave up his post, and wrote the original commands.

殷复兴，诸侯归之，故称中宗。
殷朝重新兴旺，诸侯都来归顺，为此，称太戊为“中宗”。
Yin prospered again, and the princes gave their allegiance to the Emperor, who was called Middle Master.

中宗崩，子帝中丁立。
中宗去世后，其子中丁继位。
Middle Master died, and his son Emperor Zhongding (Middle D) came to the throne.

帝中丁迁于嗷。
殷帝中丁将国都迁往傲邑，
Emperor Zhongding removed to Ao.

河亶甲居相。
后来河亶甲又将都城迁到相邑，
Hedanjia lived in Xiang.

祖乙迁于邢。
再后来祖乙又将都城迁到了邢邑。
Zuyi removed to Geng.

帝中丁崩，弟外壬立，是为帝外壬。
中丁死后，其弟外壬继位，这就是帝外壬。
Emperor Zhongding died, and his brother Wairen (Outer I), that is Emperor Wairen, came to the throne.

仲丁书阙不具。
仲丁的事迹记载不详。
The omissions in the book 'Zhongding' were not supplied.

帝外壬崩，弟河亶甲立，是为帝河亶甲。
外壬死后，其弟河亶甲继位，这就是帝河亶甲。
Emperor Wairen died, and his brother Hedanjia (River Truth A), that is Emperor Hedanjia, came to the throne.

河亶甲时，殷复衰。
河亶甲在位时，殷朝重又衰败。
In his time the influence of Yin again began to wane.

河亶甲崩，子帝祖乙立。
河亶甲死后，子祖乙继位。
Hedanjia died, and his son Emperor Zuyi (Ancestor B) came to the throne.

帝祖乙立，殷复兴。巫贤任职。
祖乙继位后，殷朝又复兴，这时有巫贤居官任职。
In Emperor Zuyi's time Yin again prospered, and the wizard Xian held office.

祖乙崩，子帝祖辛立。
祖乙死后，子祖辛继位。
Zuyi died, and his son Emperor Zuxin (Ancestor H) came to the throne.

帝祖辛崩，弟沃甲立，是为帝沃甲。
祖辛死后，其弟沃甲继位，这就是帝沃甲。
Emperor Zuxin died, and his brother Wojia (Glossy A), i.e. Emperor Wojia, came to the throne.

帝沃甲崩，立沃甲兄祖辛之子祖丁,是为帝祖丁。
沃甲死后，他的哥哥祖辛的儿子祖丁继位，这就是帝祖丁。
Emperor Wojia died, and Zuding (Ancestor D), that is Emperor Zuding, who was Wojia's elder brother, was put on the throne.

帝祖丁崩，立弟沃甲之子南庚,是为帝南庚。
祖丁死后，他弟弟沃甲的儿子南庚继位，是为帝南庚。
Emperor Zuding died, and his brother Wojia's son, Nangeng (South G), that is Emperor Nangeng, was put on the throne.

帝南庚崩，立帝祖丁之子阳甲，是为帝阳甲。
南庚死后，祖丁之子阳甲继位，这就是帝阳甲。
Emperor Nangeng died, and Emperor Zuding's son Yangjia (Male A), that is Emperor Yangjia, was put on the throne.

帝阳甲之时，殷衰。
阳甲在位期间，殷朝衰败。
In his reign the power of the Yins declined.

自中丁以来，废適而更立诸弟，弟子或争相代立，比九世乱,于是诸侯莫朝。
自中丁以后，不立长子而改由诸弟继位，造成了侄子与叔叔相互争夺的纠纷，一连九代不安宁，于是诸侯们不来朝贡了。
Ever since the reign of Zhongding the legitimate heir had been set aside, and junior scions put on the throne instead. These used to fight and displace each other. For the last nine generations there had been anarchy, and the princes neglected to come to court.

当是之时，匈奴新大人朝那，杀北地都尉卬。
当时，匈奴新近大举入侵朝那，杀死北地都尉孙卬。
When the Huns had just invaded Chaona in force, killing Sun Ang, the army commander of Beidi,

上以胡寇为意，乃卒复问唐曰:“公何以知吾不能用廉颇、李牧也?”
皇上忧虑胡人进犯这件事，就终于又去问冯唐:“你怎么知道我不能任用廉颇、李牧呢?”
and the emperor was worried about their incursions, he finally asked Feng Tang how he knew he couldn't make good use of men like Lian Po or Li Mu;

唐对曰:“臣闻上古王者之遣将也，跪而推毂，曰阃以内者，寡人制之;阃以外者，将军制之。”
冯唐回答说:“我听说上古的时候，君王派遣将官，要跪下推着车子，说朝中的事情，我来决定;外面的事情，将军来决定。”
in response, Feng Tang answered that he had heard ancient kings would kneel to push a general’s chariot wheels when seeing them off to war, saying they would handle domestic affairs while the general managed matters abroad,

军功爵赏，皆决于外，归而奏之。此非虚言也。
军功和爵位赏赐都由外面的将军决定，回来时再上奏朝廷。这不是虚妄的话。
with all military distinctions and awards decided by the general who only reported them after returning, and he added he was not making this up,

臣大父言，李牧为赵将居边，军市之租皆自用飨士，赏赐决于外，不从中扰也。
我祖父说，李牧做赵国的将官守卫边塞，军中市场上征来的租税都自己用来赏赐士卒，赏赐由外面的将军决定，君王不从中干扰。
then recounted his grandfather’s story that when Li Mu served as a general at Zhao's frontier, he spent all revenue from camp markets on his men and decided awards without court interference,

委任而责成功，故李牧乃得尽其智能，遣选车千三百乘，毂骑万三千，百金之士十万，
委托给他重任而要求他成功，因此李牧才能充分发挥他的智慧和才能，派遣选拔出来的战车一千三百辆，善射的骑兵一万三千人，能建战功的精锐士卒十万人，
allowing him to fully use his wisdom and ability—with 1,300 chariots, 13,000 mounted archers, and 100,000 elite fighters,

是以北逐单于，破东胡，灭澹林，西抑强秦，南支韩、魏。
因此向北驱逐了单于，击破了东胡，消灭了澹林，在西面抑制了强大的秦国，在南面抗拒韩、魏。
Li Mu drove away the Hunnish khan in the north, routed the Donghu, destroyed the Danlin, halted powerful Qin’s advance in the west, and supported Han (403B.C.-230B.C.) and Wei (403B.C.-225B.C.) in the south,

当是之时，赵几霸。
当时，赵国几乎称霸天下。
making Zhao nearly the leader of the states,

其后会赵王迁立，其母倡也。
这以后赶上赵王迁即位，他的母亲原是艺妓。
but later King Qian (son of a dancing girl) ascended the throne,

王迁立，乃用郭开谗，卒诛李牧，令颜聚代之。
赵王迁即位，就因为听了郭开的谗言，终于杀掉了李牧，让颜聚代替他。
listened to Guo Kai’s slanders, killed Li Mu, and appointed Yan Ju instead,

是以兵破士北，为秦所禽灭。
因此军队战败，被秦国消灭掉了。
leading to Zhao’s army defeat, men fleeing, and King Qian’s capture by Qin;

今臣窃闻魏尚为云中守，其军市租尽以维士卒，出私养钱，五日一椎牛，飨宾客军吏舍人，
如今我私下里听说魏尚担任云中太守，他把军中市场上征来的租税全部拿来赏赐士兵，还拿出自己的俸禄，每五天椎杀一头牛，款待宾客、军吏和属官，
Feng Tang then said he heard Wei Shang, when governor of Yunzhong, used all camp market revenue to feast his troops and spent his own money to kill an ox every five days for his protégés, officers, and stewards,

是以匈奴远避，不近云中之塞。
因此匈奴远远地避开，不敢靠近云中要塞。
keeping the Huns at a distance from Yunzhong’s ramparts,

虏曾一人，尚率车骑击之，所杀甚众。
匈奴曾经有一次入侵，魏尚率领兵马抗击，杀死非常多的敌人。
and inflicting heavy casualties on them when they crossed the frontier,

夫士卒尽家人子，起田中从军，安知尺籍伍符。
那些士卒全都是民家子弟，从乡村出来参军，怎会知道“尺籍”“伍符”之类的军中法令。
and he pointed out that soldiers were simple peasants from the fields who knew nothing of official documents (like military registers and team rosters),

终日力战，斩首捕虏，上功莫府，一言不相应，文吏以法绳之。
整天努力战斗，斩杀敌人首级，抓捕敌军俘虏，向将官报功时，仅仅一句话没有互相符合，司法官就用法令来制裁他们。
yet after hard fighting, if there was inconsistency in their reports of enemies killed or captured when submitting merits to the headquarters, civil officers punished them by law,

其赏不行而吏奉法必用。
他们应得的赏赐没有给予，可是司法官奉行的法令却一定要执行。
while rewards were rarely granted;

臣愚，以为陛下法太明，赏太轻，罚太重。
我很愚蠢，认为陛下的法令太严明，赏赐太轻，惩罚太重。
concluding that in his humble opinion, the emperor’s laws were too strict, rewards too small, and penalties too heavy—

且云中守魏尚坐上功首虏差六级，陛下下之吏，削其爵，罚作之。
况且云中太守魏尚就因为上报斩杀的敌人差了六个首级，陛下把他交付给司法官治罪，削夺了他的爵位，判处了一年徒刑。
citing Wei Shang’s punishment (tried, degraded of his title, and sentenced to penal servitude for reporting six more enemy heads than the actual number) as proof,

由此言之，陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。
从这件事说来，陛下即使是得到了廉颇、李牧，也不会使用的。
that even Lian Po or Li Mu would not be usable by the emperor,

臣诚愚，触忌讳，死罪死罪!
我确实愚蠢，触犯了忌讳，死罪死罪!
and he apologized for being a simpleton who couldn’t hold his tongue and deserved death for his presumption;

文帝说。
文帝听了很高兴。
Emperor Wen was pleased,

是日令冯唐持节赦魏尚，复以为云中守，
当天下令让冯唐持节赦免魏尚，重新让他担任云中太守，
so that same day he sent Feng Tang with imperial credentials to pardon Wei Shang and reinstate him as governor of Yunzhong,

而拜唐为车骑都尉，主中尉及郡国车士。
并且拜冯唐为车骑都尉，掌管中尉和各郡国的车战士兵。
and made Feng Tang a tribune of chariots and cavalry in charge of the chariots and horsemen under the Central Garrison Commander (Zhongwei) and local principalities.

帝武丁崩，子帝祖庚立。
武丁死后，其子祖庚继位。
Emperor Wuding died, and his son Emperor Zugeng (Ancestor G) came to the throne.

祖己嘉武丁之以祥雉为德，立其庙为高宗，遂作《高宗彤日》及《训》。
祖己称道武丁因野鸡之鸣而注意修德，遂为武丁建庙，称之为“高宗”，并作了《高宗彤日》及《高宗之训》。
Zuji commended Wuding for considering the omen of the pheasant as a ground for practising virtue, and conferred on him the posthumous title of 'exalted ancestor,' and the 'Day of the Supplementary Sacrifice of Gaozong' and the 'Instructions [to Gaozong]' were written.

帝祖庚崩，弟祖甲立，是为帝甲。
祖庚死后，其弟祖甲继位，史称帝甲。
Emperor Zugeng died, and his brother Zujia (Ancestor A), that is Emperor Jia, came to the throne.

帝甲淫乱，殷复衰。
帝甲荒淫乱法，殷朝复又衰败。
He was dissipated, and the fortunes of Yin again waned.

帝甲崩，子帝廪辛立。
帝甲死后，其子辛继位。
Emperor Jia died, and his son Emperor Linxin (Granary H) sat on the throne.

帝廪辛崩，弟庚丁立，是为帝庚丁。
辛死后，其弟庚丁继位，史称帝庚丁。
Emperor Linxin died, and his brother Gengding (G. D), that is Emperor Gengding, sat on the throne.

帝庚丁崩，子帝武乙立。
庚丁死后，其子武乙继位。
Emperor Gengding died, and his son Emperor Wuyi (Martial B) sat on the throne.

殷复去亳，徙河北。
殷朝又离开亳邑，迁往黄河以北。
The Yins again left Bo, and crossed to the north bank of the river.
帝武乙无道，为偶人,谓之天神。
帝武乙不按帝王之规行事，他做了个木偶，说它是天神。
The Emperor Wuyi was unprincipled and made images, which he called 'Heavenly gods.'

与之博,令人为行。
武乙要和这个“天神”较量，他让人替“天神”投掷。
With these he played chess, ordering some one to make the moves for them;

天神不胜，乃缪辱之。
“天神”输了，于是武乙就侮辱他。
and when the 'celestial gods' did not win he abused them,

为革囊，盛血，卬而射之,命曰“射天”。
武乙用皮革做了一条口袋，里面装满了血，他把这个口袋挂得高高的，从下面往上射，说这是“射天”。
and making a leather bag, filled it with blood, threw it up and shot at it. This he called shooting at Heaven.

武乙猎于河渭之间，暴雷，武乙震死。
武乙到黄河与渭水汇合的地方打猎，遇着打雷，被击死了。
While Wuyi was hunting between the Yellow and Wei rivers, there was a clap of thunder, and Wuyi was struck dead by lightning.

子帝太丁立。
其子太丁继位。
His son Emperor Taiding (Great D) came to the throne.

帝太丁崩，子帝乙立。
太丁死后，其子乙继位。
Emperor Taiding died, and his son Emperor Yi (B) sat on the throne.

帝乙立，殷益衰。
帝乙即位后，殷朝愈加衰败。
In his reign the fortunes of Yin declined still further.

帝乙长子曰微子启,启母贱，不得嗣。
帝乙的长子叫微子启，启的母亲地位低下，因此启不得继位。
Emperor Yi's (B) eldest son was Qi, viscount of Wei. Qi's mother being of low caste, he could not be heir to the throne.

少子辛，辛母正后，辛为嗣。
小儿子叫辛，辛的母亲是王后，所以辛是帝乙的继承人。
His younger son was Xin (X), whose mother was the principal consort, and so he became the heir-apparent.

帝乙崩，子辛立，是为帝辛，天下谓之纣。
帝乙死后，其子辛继位，这就是帝辛，天下称之为纣。
Emperor Yi died, and his son Xin sat on the throne. Emperor Xin was called by everybody in the empire Zhou (the tyrant).

帝纣资辨捷疾,闻见甚敏;材力过人,手格猛兽。
帝纣天资聪敏，反应快，力气超常，能空手与猛兽格斗。
Emperor Zhou's discrimination was acute, his hearing and sight particularly good, his natural abilities extraordinary, and his physical strength equal to that of a wild beast.

知足以距谏，言足以饰非;矜人臣以能,高天下以声，以为皆出己之下。
他的才智足以使他挡回任何劝谏，他的能言善辩足以帮他文过饰非；他喜欢在群臣面前夸示自己的才干，希望让自己的名声高过普天下的任何人，他认为天底下没有一个人能与他相比。
He had cunning enough to evade reproofs, and volubility enough to gloss over his faults. He boasted that he was above his ministers on the ground of ability, and that he surpassed the people of the empire on account of his reputation.

好酒淫乐，嬖于妇人。爱妲己，妲己之言是从。
他喜欢饮酒作乐，贪恋女色；他宠爱妲己，唯妲己之言是听。
He indulged in wine, women, and lusts of all sorts. His partiality for Taji (Actress F) caused him to carry out whatever she desired.

于是使师涓作新淫声,北里之舞，靡靡之乐。
他让乐工师涓谱制淫荡的曲子，他用北方的淫猥之舞配合这种靡靡之乐。
so that his ministers had to devise new forms of dissipation, the most depraved dances and extravagant music.

厚赋税以实鹿台之钱,而盈巨桥之粟。
他横征暴敛以填满鹿台的钱库和巨桥的粮仓。
he increased the taxation in order to fill the Stag tower with money, and to store the granary at 'Big bridge.'

益收狗马奇物，充仞宫室。
他搜求各种狗马奇物，聚于宫中。
He made a collection of dogs, horses, and curiosities, with which he filled his palaces.

益广沙丘苑台,多取野兽蜚鸟置其中。
他扩建沙丘的亭台园圃，搜罗各种珍禽异兽置于其中。
and enlarging his parks and towers at Shaqiu, procured numbers of wild beasts and birds and put them therein.

慢于鬼神。
帝纣从来不敬神。
He slighted the spirits.

大最乐戏于沙丘，以酒为池，县肉为林，使男女倮相逐其间,为长夜之饮。
他把许多乐工戏子叫到沙丘来，他用酒灌成池沼，把肉悬挂成林，让男男女女光着身子在里面追逐嬉戏，彻夜不息。
assembled a great number of play actors at Shaqiu, made a pond of wine, hung the trees with meat, made men and women chase each other about quite naked, and had drinking bouts the whole night long.

百姓怨望而诸侯有畔者,于是纣乃重刑辟,有炮格之法。
百姓中有对此表示怨恨，诸侯中有表现背叛的，帝纣就对他们施以重刑，还特意制作了一种非常残酷的刑具，名为“炮格”刑罚。
The people murmured, and when the nobles rebelled Zhouxin increased the severity of his punishments, instituting the punishment of roasting.

以西伯昌、九侯、鄂侯为三公。
他任命西伯昌、九侯、鄂侯为三公。
He appointed Chang Chief of the West, the prince of Jiu, and the prince of E his three principal ministers.

九侯有好女，入之纣。
九侯有个女儿长得漂亮，九侯把她献给了帝纣。
The prince of Jiu had a beloved daughter who was sent in to the emperor,

九侯女不意淫,纣怒，杀之，而醯九侯。
由于九侯的女儿不喜欢淫荡，帝纣就发怒把她杀了，还把九侯剁成了肉酱。
and when she disapproved of his debaucheries the tyrant killed her in his rage, and made mincemeat of her father.

鄂侯争之强，辨之疾，并脯鄂侯。
鄂侯劝帝纣不要这么做，争执得很激烈，于是帝纣就把鄂侯也杀了，而且把他制成肉干。
The prince of E objected, and vehemently remonstrated with him, whereupon he was sliced to pieces.

西伯昌闻之，窃叹。崇侯虎知之,以告纣，纣囚西伯羑里。
西伯昌听说后暗自叹息了几声，崇侯虎向帝纣告了密，帝纣便把西伯昌囚禁在羑里。
Chang Chief of the West, hearing of all this, sighed furtively, but 'Tiger' the prince of Chong, being aware of it, informed the tyrant, who thereupon cast Chief of the West into prison at Youli.

西伯之臣闳夭之徒,求美女奇物善马以献纣，纣乃赦西伯。
西伯昌的臣子闳夭等人找到了一些美女、珍宝、良马等献给帝纣，帝纣这才释放了西伯昌。
His servant Hongyao and others procured a pretty girl, rare curiosities, and fine horses, which they presented to the tyrant, who thereupon pardoned Chief of the West.

西伯出而献洛西之地,以请除炮格之刑。
西伯昌出狱后，把洛水以西的地盘献给了帝纣，请求他废除炮格之刑。
The latter went forth and gave the country to the west of the Luo river to the tyrant, and begged that he would abolish the punishment of roasting.

纣乃许之，赐弓矢斧钺，使得征伐，为西伯。
帝纣答应了，并赐给他弓矢斧钺，授予他征伐之权，让他充当西方的诸侯之长。
The emperor agreed to this, and gave him bows, arrows, axes, and halberds, with a commission to start on a warlike expedition. He was appointed Chief of the West,

而用费中为政。费中善谀，好利，殷人弗亲。
帝纣任用费中主持国政，费中善于阿谀奉承，好谋私利，殷人都不愿意与之亲近。
and Feizhong was employed in the government. Feizhong was fond of flattery and greedy of gain, so the men of Yin were not attached to him.

纣又用恶来。恶来善毁谗，诸侯以此益疏。
帝纣又任用恶来，恶来好进谗言，说人坏话，诸侯为此与纣愈加疏远。
The tyrant also gave Elai an appointment, but Elai was fond of vilifying persons, so the princes became more and more estranged from the court.

西伯归，乃阴修德行善，诸侯多叛纣而往归西伯。
西伯昌回国后暗中修德行善，诸侯中有不少背叛帝纣的人都来归附西伯昌。
Now Chief of the West, on returning from his expedition, secretly cultivated virtue, and was charitable; many of the princes revolted from the tyrant and gave their allegiance to Chief of the West.

西伯滋大，纣由是稍失权重。
西伯昌的势力逐渐强大，而帝纣的权威则从此逐渐削弱。
who from this time gained in influence, while the tyrant rather lost his authority.

王子比干谏，弗听。
王子比干劝谏帝纣，帝纣不听。
The monarch's son Bigan remonstrated with his father, but he was not listened to.

商容贤者，百姓爱之，纣废之。
商容是当时有名的贤者，深受百姓拥戴，但帝纣却将他废弃不用。
Shangrong praised his worth, and the people loved him, but the tyrant set him aside.

及西伯伐饥国，灭之，纣之臣祖伊闻之而咎周，恐，奔告纣曰。
及至西伯昌讨伐饥国，消灭饥国后，帝纣的大臣祖伊斥责周国，担心周国的势力无法控制，赶忙向帝纣报告说。
Chief of the West marched against and conquered the Ji State, and the tyrant's minister Zu-yi heard of it, and blaming [the house of] Zhou hurried off in alarm to report it to the tyrant.

天既讫我殷命，假人元龟，无敢知吉，非先王不相我后人，维王淫虐用自绝，故天弃我，不有安食，不虞知天性，不迪率典。
上天已经终止了我们殷朝的命运，能看清形势的人和所有的占卜都不认为我们还有什么吉祥可言。不是祖先不保佑我们这些后代，是因为你的荒淫无道把商朝葬送了。上天抛弃了我们，让商朝的宗庙不能再享受祭祀。可是你至今还不思索体察上天的意旨，还不遵循先王的纲常旧典。
Heaven is bringing to an end the destiny of our dynasty of Yin; great men and the ancient tortoise do not venture to foretell good fortune. It is not that the former kings do not aid us men of this later time; but you, O king, by your dissoluteness and oppression are cutting yourself off. Heaven has therefore rejected us; we do not eat our meals in peace, we do not consider our heavenly nature, we do not follow and observe the statutes.

今我民罔不欲丧，曰：“天曷不降威，大命胡不至”？今王其奈何？
如今的民众没有一个不盼望商朝的灭亡，他们说：“老天爷为什么不显示威灵，商王的死期为什么还不到来？”情况已经如此，大王打算怎么办？
Our people are now all longing for the destruction of the dynasty, saying, Why does not Heaven send down its awe-inspiring authority? Why is not its great decree manifested? What remedy is there against the present king?

纣曰：“我生不有命在天乎！”
帝纣说：“我的权力与富贵不是来自天命吗？别人能把我怎么样！”
The tyrant said: "Is not my life secured by the decree of Heaven?"

祖伊反，曰：“纣不可谏矣。”
祖伊从帝纣那里回来，说：“纣王已经到了不可劝谏的地步了。”
Zu-yi returned, and said, "The tyrant cannot be remonstrated with."

西伯既卒，周武王之东伐，至盟津，诸侯叛殷会周者八百。
西伯昌死后，周武王率师东伐，到了孟津，诸侯背叛殷朝而前来与周武王汇合的有几百个。
Chief of the West having died, King Wu of Zhou in his march eastward arrived at the ford of Meng. The princes revolted, and 800 princes of the house of Zhou having assembled.

诸侯皆曰：“纣可伐矣。”
诸侯们说：“该是讨伐商纣的时候了。”
declared that the tyrant ought to be attacked.

武王曰：“尔未知天命。”乃复归。
武王说：“你们还不完全清楚上天的意思。”于是又班师返回周地。
King Wu said, "You know nothing of Heaven's decree," and retired.

纣愈淫乱不止。
帝纣愈加荒淫无道，
The tyrant abandoned himself all the more to lust and dissipation,

微子数谏不听，乃与大师、少师谋,遂去。
微子多次劝谏他都不听，于是微子就与太师、少师商量后，离开了殷国。
and the viscount of Wei remonstrated with him several times, but he would not heed, so having consulted with the senior and junior tutors the viscount of Wei withdrew from court.

比干曰：“为人臣者，不得不以死争。”乃强谏纣。
比干不肯离去，他说：“作为臣子，应以死力争。”因而再三劝谏。
Bigan said, 'A minister cannot but argue to the death'; he accordingly remonstrated vehemently with the tyrant,

纣怒曰：“吾闻圣人心有七窍。”剖比干，观其心。
纣大怒说：“我听说圣人的心有七窍。”于是剖开了比干的胸膛，把他的心挖出来看。
who in a rage said, 'I have heard that the heart of a holy man has seven apertures,' and cut Bigan open to look at his heart.

箕子惧,乃详狂为奴，纣又囚之。
箕子见了很害怕，就装疯去给人家当奴隶，帝纣知道后还是把他关了起来。
The viscount of Ji, in terror, then feigned himself mad, and became a slave, and the tyrant again imprisoned him.

殷之大师、少师乃持其祭乐器奔周。
殷朝的太师、少师带着他们的乐器逃到了周国。
The senior and junior tutors of Yin, accordingly, taking the sacrificial and musical implements, hastened to the Zhou State,

周武王于是遂率诸侯伐纣，纣亦发兵距之牧野。
周武王认为时机到了，便率领诸侯讨伐帝纣，帝纣也派兵在牧野迎击。
and King Wu of Zhou upon this marched at the head of the princes to attack the tyrant, who also sent out an army to withstand him in the plain of Mu.

甲子日,纣兵败。
甲子日的早晨，帝纣的军队溃败下来。
On the day Jiazi the tyrant's troops were beaten,

纣走入登鹿台,衣其宝玉衣，赴火而死。
帝纣逃入城中登上鹿台，穿上他的宝玉衣，跳进火中自焚而死。
and he himself fled to the Stag tower, which he ascended, and, putting on his gorgeous robes and jewels, burnt himself to death.

周武王遂斩纣头，县之大白旗。杀妲己。
周武王率军进宫，斩下帝纣的头挂在大白旗的旗杆上，同时也杀了妲己。
King Wu of Zhou then cut off the tyrant's head and exhibited it on a pole; he also slew Daji,

释箕子之囚，封比干之墓,表商容之闾。
释放了被囚的箕子，重修了比干的坟墓，在商容所住的里门上挂匾给予表彰。
released the viscount of Ji from prison, raised a tumulus over the grave of Bigan, and made a eulogy to the memory of Shangrong.

封纣子武庚禄父，以续殷祀,令修行盘庚之政。
周武王让帝纣的儿子武庚禄父仍然住在朝歌以主持对他先祖的祭祀，并责令他要实行盘庚时代的德政。
His sons, Wugeng and Lufu, were appointed to continue the sacrifices to the Yins. He restored Pangeng's mode of administration,

殷民大说。
殷朝的民众对此很满意。
and the people of Yin were greatly rejoiced.

于是周武王为天子。
于是周武王即天子之位。
Whereupon King Wu of Zhou became Son of Heaven (emperor).

其后世贬帝号，号为王。
其后世不再称“帝”,而改为称“王”。
His descendants abolished the title of Di (divine emperor), and called themselves kings (Wang);

而封殷后为诸侯，属周。
周朝封殷朝的后代为诸侯，让他管理殷朝的遗民，是周朝治下的属国之一。
and the descendants of the Yins were made princes subordinate to the house of Zhou.

周武王崩,武庚与管叔、蔡叔作乱,成王命周公诛之,而立微子于宋，以续殷后焉。
周武王死后，武庚伙同管叔、蔡叔发动叛乱，成王让周公诛灭了他们，改封微子于宋国，以继续殷朝的祭祀。
After the death of King Wu of Zhou, Wugeng, Guanshu, and Caishu rebelled. King Cheng ordered the duke of Zhou to execute them, and the viscount of Wei was established in the Song State to continue (the ancestral worship as) a descendant of the Yins.

太史公曰：余以《颂》次契之事，自成汤以来，采于《书》、《诗》。
太史公说：契的事迹，我是根据《商颂》写的，成汤以来的事迹则是采用《尚书》、《诗经》中的资料。
The historian remarks on this as follows: I have recounted the deeds of Qi based on the Odes of Shang; for events from Cheng Tang onwards, I have drawn materials from the Book of Documents and the Book of Songs.

契为子姓，其后分封，以国为姓,有殷氏、来氏、宋氏、空桐氏、稚氏、北殷氏、目夷氏。
契姓子，他的后代获得分封，就以封地为姓，有殷氏、来氏、宋氏、空桐氏、稚氏、北殷氏、目夷氏。
Qi bore the surname Zi, and his descendants, when enfeoffed with states, took the names of those states as their surnames. Thus, there came to be clans such as Yin, Lai, Song, Kongtong, Zhi, Beiyin, and Muyi.

孔子曰，殷路车为善,而色尚白。
孔子说，殷朝的车驾是很不错的，崇尚白色。
Confucius said, "The carriages of the Yin Dynasty were well-crafted, and they held the color white in high esteem."