
黄帝者，少典之子，姓公孙，名曰轩辕。
黄帝是少典氏的后代，姓公孙，名轩辕。
Huangdi (Yellow emperor) was the son of Shaodian. His surname was Gongsun, and his prename Xuanyuan.

生而神灵，弱而能言，幼而徇齐，长而敦敏，成而聪明。
轩辕刚生下来就显出与众不同的灵异，几个月就会说话，三五岁就表现出思维敏捷，反应很快，少年时代非常勤勉，成年以后识辨力很强。
Born a genius he could speak when a baby, as a boy he was quick and smart, as a youth simple and earnest, and when grown up intelligent.

轩辕之时，神农氏世衰。
当轩辕还是诸侯时，神农氏的统治逐渐衰弱。
In the time of Xuanyuan, Shennong became enfeebled.

诸侯相侵伐，暴虐百姓，而神农氏弗能征。
诸侯之间互相侵伐，祸害百姓，而神农氏无力讨伐。
The princes made raids on each other and harassed the people, but Shennong could not chastise them.

于是轩辕乃习用干戈，以征不享，诸侯咸来宾从。
于是轩辕就动用武力去讨伐那些不守纪律、不来朝拜神农氏的人，因而诸侯都对他表示臣服与追随。
so Xuanyuan exercised himself in the use of weapons of war, so as to be able to punish irregularities. The princes all came and did homage.

而蚩尤最为暴，莫能伐。
而蚩尤最凶暴，没有人能够制服他。
but Chiyou, the fiercest of all, could not be subdued.

炎帝欲侵陵诸侯，诸侯咸归轩辕。
炎帝也好欺凌他人，因此诸侯们都拥护轩辕。
Yandi (Flame emperor) wished to oppress the princes, so they turned to Xuanyuan.

轩辕乃修德振兵，治五气、爇五种、抚万民、度四方，教熊罴貔貅躯虎，以与炎帝战于阪泉之野。
在这种情况下，轩辕修炼仁德，扩展军备，建立阴阳五行之说，广种五谷，安抚民众，考察四方的边疆国界，甚至训练熊黑貔貅躯虎以备参加作战。
who practised virtue, marshalled his men, controlled the five elements, cultivated the five kinds of grain, pacified the nations, and went over all parts of his country. Training black bears, grizzly bears, foxes, panthers, lynxes, and tigers, he, with their aid, fought with 'Flame emperor' in the desert of Banquan.

三战，然后得其志。
后来终于在阪泉之野经过三次交战，把炎帝打败。
and, after three battles, realised his wishes.

蚩尤作乱，不用帝命。
但蚩尤仍经常叛乱，不听轩辕指挥。
Chiyou was a rebel, who did not obey the Emperor's command.

于是黄帝乃征师诸侯，与蚩尤战于涿鹿之野，遂禽杀蚩尤。
于是轩辕又征集诸侯的军队，与蚩尤大战于涿鹿的郊野，擒获了蚩尤并把他杀掉。
so Huangdi, levying an army of the princes, fought against Chiyou, captured, and slew him in the desert of Zhuolu.

而诸侯咸尊轩辕为天子，代神农氏，是为黄帝。天下有不顺者，黄帝从而征之，平者去之，披山通道，未尝宁居。
这时天下诸侯都尊轩辕为天子，代替了神农氏，这就是黄帝。从此天下有不归顺的，黄帝就去征讨他，顺从了，就立即率军离去，到处开山拓路，从来没有清闲过。
The princes all agreed that Xuanyuan should be the Emperor in place of Shennong, under the title Huangdi. Those in the empire who would not submit, Huangdi pursued and chastised, and when they were subdued he left them. He made cuttings in hills, opened roads, and was never at rest.

东至于海，登丸山，及岱宗。
黄帝向东到达海边，曾登上丸山和泰山。
Eastward his empire extended to the sea, Ball hill, and the ancestral Dai mountain;

西至于空桐，登鸡头。
向西到达空桐，登上鸡头山。
westward to 'Hollow cave' and Cock's-head hills;

南至于江，登熊、湘。
向南到达长江，登上熊耳山、湘山。
southward to the Yangtze river and Xiongxiang hill;

北逐荤粥，合符釜山，而邑于涿鹿之阿。
向北驱逐了荤粥，在釜山与诸侯们聚会结盟，黄帝曾建都于涿鹿山下的平地。
while in the north he drove out the Xunyu. He made a treaty on Kettle hill, and built a city on the slopes of Zhuolu.

迁徙往来无常处，以师兵为营卫。
黄帝常率领部众到处迁移，没有固定的地方，走到哪里就在哪里安营扎寨，四周让军队做好警卫。
He was constantly changing his residence, while his troops formed an encampment about him.
 
官名皆以云命，为云师。
黄帝手下的百官都用 “云” 字命名，军队里的长官也以 “云” 字相称。
He ordered his officers to be named after cloud omens.
 
置左右大监，监于万国。
朝廷里设左右大监，监督天下诸国。
He appointed a chief and deputy superintendent over international affairs,
 
万国和，而鬼神山川封禅与为多焉。
当时各国诸侯相处和睦，而黄帝对山川、鬼神、天地所进行的祭祀活动也最为繁多。
and the various states being at peace, he worshipped the demons and spirits of the hills and streams with the feng and shan ceremonies in numbers.
 
获宝鼎，迎日推笑。（注：“推笑” 应为 “推筴”（蓍草推算）之误，语义为观测太阳、用蓍草推算历法）
黄帝曾获得宝鼎，他观测太阳的运行，用蓍草推算，制定了历法。
He obtained a valuable tripod, and made calculations of future events,

举风后、力牧、常先、大鸿以治民。
他提拔了风后、力牧、常先、大鸿四位大臣，让他们治理百姓。
appointing 'Chief of the winds,' 'Strength-governor,' 'Everfirst,' and 'Great Swan,' to direct the people

顺天地之纪，幽明之占，死生之说，存亡之难。
黄帝遵循着天地运行的规律，遵循着阴阳相倚相伏的法则，顺应着万事万物生与死、存与亡相互转化的过程。
to act in accordance with the celestial and terrestrial arrangements, the dark and bright prognostications, the disputations on life and death,

时播百谷草木，淳化鸟兽虫蛾，旁罗日月星辰，水波土石金玉。
他适时地播种谷物，栽种草木，养殖鸟兽昆虫，供人们使用。他观测天文星象，利用水源乃至土石金玉。
the planting of the crops, plants, and trees in their seasons, and the transformations of birds, beasts, insects, and moths. He also prepared a record of the movements of the sun, moon, and stars; the flow of the tides; and the properties of clay, stones, metals, and gems.

劳勤心力耳目，节用水火材物。
他教导人们做事要尽心竭力，不能偷懒，对于山林沼泽动植物的捕捉采伐，要依照节令，用之有度。
He devoted much careful attention to these things, and his observation was applied to ascertaining how fire, water, wood, and other elements could be used economically.

有土德之瑞，故号黄帝。
黄帝在位时，有巨大的地蚓出现，人们认为这是 “土德” 之瑞，所以称轩辕为黄帝。
There was an auspicious omen of the earth's energy, and he was therefore called 'Yellow god.'

黄帝居轩辕之丘，而娶于西陵之女，是为嫘祖。
黄帝曾居住在轩辕之丘，娶西陵氏之女为妻，这就是嫘祖。
Huangdi lived at Xuanyuan hill, and married a woman of 'Western range' land called Leizu, who was his principal wife,

嫘祖为黄帝正妃，生二子，其后皆有天下：其一曰玄嚣，是为青阳，青阳降居江水；其二曰昌意，降居若水。
螺祖是黄帝的正妃，生有两个儿子，他们的后代都曾拥有天下。一个叫玄嚣，也称作青阳，青阳被封在长江流域；另一个叫昌意，被封在若水。
and bore him two sons, both of whose descendants held Imperial sway. The eldest, named Xuanxiao, or Qingyang, dwelt on the Jiang stream, and the other, who was named Changyi, dwelt on the Ruo stream.

昌意娶蜀山氏女，曰昌仆，生高阳，高阳有圣德焉。
昌意娶蜀山氏的女儿为妻，名叫昌仆，生的儿子叫高阳。高阳有圣人之德。
Changyi married a woman from the Shu hills (Sichuan) named Changpu, who bore him a son, Gaoyang, who possessed the virtue of a sage.

黄帝崩，葬桥山。
黄帝死后葬在桥山，
Huangdi died, and was buried at Qiaoshan,
 
其孙昌意之子高阳立，是为帝颛顼也。
他的孙子，也就是昌意的儿子高阳继位，这就是帝颛顼。
and his grandson, Changyi's son Gaoyang, came to the throne under the title Emperor Zhuanxu.

帝颛顼高阳者，黄帝之孙而昌意之子也。
颛顼高阳是黄帝的孙子、昌意的儿子。
Emperor Zhaunxu, or Gaoyang, was Huangdi's grandson and Changyi's son.

静渊以有谋，疏通而知事；养材以任地，载时以象天，依鬼神以制义，治气以教化，絜诚以祭祀。
他深沉内向，心计颇多，通晓事理；他能因地制宜种植谷物，又能根据天象定出一年四季，能按照祖宗神灵的旨意指导人们的行为，以阴阳五行的原则教化人民，使人们在祭祀时做到祭品洁净、态度虔诚。
Calm and unfathomable in his designs, and thoroughly versed in all matters, he exercised his talents in cultivating the ground; he recorded in their seasons the movements of the heavenly bodies, relied on spiritual influences in framing laws, taught reform by controlling the passion nature, and sacrificed with purity and sincerity.

北至于幽陵，南至于交险，西至于流沙，东至于蟠木。动静之物，大小之神，日月所照，莫不砥属。
他曾北至幽陵，南至交险，西至流沙，东至蟠木，所有禽兽草木、山川神灵，凡是日月所照的地方，无不对他尊敬臣服。
Northward his rule extended to 'Dark mound,' southward to Annam, westward to the moving sands, and eastward to 'Coiling tree'. Of animate and inanimate things, of spirits great and small, of those on whom the sun and moon shone, all were equally subject to him.

帝颛顼生子曰穷蝉。
颛顼的儿子叫穷蝉。
Emperor Zhuanxu had a son, Chiungchan.

颛顼崩，而玄嚣之孙高辛立，是为帝喾。
颛顼死后，玄嚣的孙子高辛继位，这就是帝喾。
Zhuanxu died, and Xuanxiao's grandson Gaoxin came to the throne under the title of Emperor Ku.

帝喾高辛者，黄帝之曾孙也。
帝喾高辛是黄帝的曾孙。
Emperor Ku, or Gaoxin was Huangdi's great grandson.

高辛父曰峤极，峤极父曰玄嚣，玄嚣父曰黄帝。
高辛的父亲叫峤极，峤极的父亲叫玄嚣，玄嚣的父亲是黄帝。
his father being Jiaoji, whose father was Xuanxiao, whose father was Huangdi.

自玄嚣与峤极皆不得在位，至高辛即帝位。
玄嚣和峤极都没有当政，到高辛才即帝位。
Neither Xuanxiao, nor Jiaoji came to the throne, but Gaoxin did hold Imperial sway.

高辛于颛顼为族子。
高辛是颛顼的堂侄。
Gaoxin was a clansman of Zhuanxu.

高辛生而神灵，自言其名。
高辛一生下来就聪慧有灵气，能说出自己的名字。
Being born a genius Gaoxin spoke from babyhood.

普施利物，不于其身。
他专门利人毫不利己。
He distributed his benefits everywhere, regardless of self.

聪以知远，明以察微。
他的聪明使他能知晓未来之事，能明察细微的征兆。
Intelligent enough to understand things far off, and clever enough to search into minutiae,

顺天之义，知民之急。
他顺天意，知民急。
he followed Heaven's laws, and knew the people's needs.

仁而威，惠而信，修身而天下服。
仁爱而有威严，施恩泽而讲信义，自律甚严而天下服从。
Humane yet dignified, kind yet truthful; he practised self-culture and all men submitted to him.

取地之财而节用之，抚教万民而利诲之，历日月而迎送之，明鬼神而敬事之。
他懂得按照节候驭用大地所生的材物，能不失时机地教导人们的生产与生活，能定出节气并按时举行迎送之礼，能区分哪些鬼神应该祭祀，并虔敬地祭祀它们。
He secured the revenue of the land, and spent it economically. He governed and instructed all his subjects, and they profited by the instruction. He made a calendar of the days and months past as well as future. He knew all about spirits, and worshipped them respectfully.

其色郁郁，其德嶷嶷。
高辛待人态度温和，自身的道德崇高。
His appearance was elegant, and his virtue eminent.

其动也时，其服也士。
他的行为举动都符合时宜，所做的事都是一个品德高尚者所应做的。
His movements were well-timed, and his dress gentlemanly.

帝喾溉执中而遍天下，日月所照，风雨所至，莫不从服。
他治理天下有如用水浇田，实行一种中正公平、不偏不倚的政策，从而使日月所照、风雨能到的地方，无人对他不服。
Emperor Ku was thoroughly impartial all over his empire. There was no one on whom the sun and moon shone, or on whom the rain and wind blew, who was not devoted to him.

帝喾娶陈锋氏女，生放勋。
高辛娶了陈锋氏的女子，生了放勋。
Emperor Ku married a daughter of Chenfeng, who bore a son named Fangxun ('The highly meritorious').

娶嫩訾氏女，生挚。
又娶了嫩訾氏的女子，生了挚。
He also married a daughter of Juzi, who bore a son Zhi.

帝喾崩，而挚代立。
高辛死后，挚继位。
Emperor Ku died, and Zhi reigned in his stead.

帝挚立，不善，而弟放勋立，是为帝尧。
帝挚在位时，其政衰微。帝挚死后，其弟放勋即位，这就是帝尧。
Zhi reigned badly and died, and his brother 'The highly meritorious one' reigned under the title of Emperor Yao.

帝尧者，放勋。
帝尧名放勋，
Emperor Yao was highly meritorious.

其仁如天，其知如神。
他的仁德如天之广阔，覆盖大地；他的智慧有如神灵，无所不晓。
His benevolence was like that of heaven, and his wisdom that of a god;

就之如日，望之如云。
人们对他的倾心归附，如同葵花向阳；人们对他的企盼，有如大旱之望云雨。
when approached he was genial as the sun, and was looked out for as clouds in dry weather.

富而不骄，贵而不舒。
他财富众多而不骄奢，他地位尊贵而不放纵。
He was rich without being proud, and esteemed yet not lax.

黄收纯衣，彤车乘白马，
他戴着黄色的帽子，穿着黑色的衣裳，坐着红色的车子，拉车的马都是白色。
He wore a yellow hat and plain silk dress, and drove a red car drawn by white horses.

能明驯德，以亲九族。
他有顺天应人的美德，能先使自己的九族亲善。
He was able to display his supereminent virtue, by bringing into close alliance the nine degrees of kindred,

九族既睦，便章百姓。
等到九族亲善后，便进一步治理朝廷百官。
and they being rendered harmonious, he forthwith regulated the people,

百姓昭明，合和万国。
等到朝廷百官的职分明确且又各司其职时，再进一步扩展到天下万国，直到使天下万国都变得融洽和睦。
and his people having become enlightened, the various states were at peace.

乃命羲和，敬顺昊天，数法日月星辰，敬授民时。
帝尧任命羲和主管天文，让他遵循上天的法则，考察日月星辰运行的规律，制定历法，告诉人们播种与收获的季节。
He then commanded Xi and He in reverent accordance with their observations of the wide heavens to record in a calendar the laws affecting the sun, moon, stars, and zodiacal spaces, and respectfully to communicate to the people the seasons (adapted for labour).

分命羲仲，居郁夷，曰旸谷。敬道日出，便程东作。日中，星鸟，以殷中春。其民析，鸟兽字微。
他让羲仲居住在郁夷的旸谷，让他虔敬地迎接东方升起的太阳，并督促黎民准备春耕生产。羲仲根据白天和黑夜的时间一样长和鸟星出现在正南方，确定这一天为 “春分”。这时人们都走向田野，忙于播种；各种鸟兽交尾，忙于繁殖。
He also commanded Xi's younger brother to reside at Yuyi, called the bright valley, so as to hail with respect the rising sun, and arrange the labours of the spring; and the day being of medium length, and the culminating star (the central one of the) 'Bird' quarter of the heavens, he was to determine midspring, when the people begin to disperse, and birds and beasts to breed and copulate.

申命羲叔，居南交。便程南为，敬致。日永，星火，以正中夏。其民因，鸟兽希革。
帝尧任命羲叔住在南方的交险，让他督管南方民众的农事活动。羲叔根据白天的时间最长和心宿出现在正南方，确定这一天为 “夏至”。这时正是夏忙，老幼都到田里劳动，鸟兽的羽毛变得稀少。
He further commanded Xi's third brother to reside at the southern frontier to arrange the transformations of summer, and respectfully observe the extreme limit (of the shadow), and the day being at its longest, and the star in the zenith that called 'Fire,' he was to fix the exact period of midsummer, when the people are most widely dispersed, birds moult, and beasts change their coats.

申命和仲，居西土，曰昧谷。敬道日入，便程西成。夜中，星虚，以正中秋。其民夷易，鸟兽毛选。
帝尧任命和仲到西部边极的昧谷，在那里敬送太阳下山，主管秋季收获的劳作。和仲根据白天和黑夜等长而虚星出现在正南方，便确定这一天为 “秋分”。这时候，人们的心情平和愉悦，鸟兽即将换毛。
He further commanded He's younger brother to reside in the west at a place called Dark Valley to respectfully convoy the setting sun, and arrange the completing labours of the autumn, and the night being of medium length, and the culminating star Xu (β in Aquarius) to determine mid-autumn, when people begin to feel comfortable, and birds and beasts look smooth and glossy.

申命和叔，居北方，曰幽都。便在伏物。日短，星昴，以正中冬。其民燠，鸟兽毛氄。（注：原文 “鸟兽毛” 后疑漏 “氄” 字，结合白话文 “厚厚的羽毛” 与英文 “downy and thick” 补全，使语义完整）
帝尧任命和叔住在北方的阴气聚集之地，他的任务是督促人们的收藏。和叔根据这时的白昼最短而昴星出现在正南方，确定这一天为 “冬至”。这时人们穿的衣服很多，鸟兽也长了厚厚的羽毛。
He further commanded He's third brother to reside in the northern region in what was called the sombre capital, to examine the hidden things, and the day being at its shortest, and the culminating star Mao (ε in Pleiades) to determine midwinter, when people get into cosy corners, and the coats of birds and beasts are downy and thick.

岁三百六十六日，以闰月正四时。
帝尧确定以三百六十六日为一年，其中设置闰月，以使四时不至于错位。
The year consisted of66 days, an intercalary month being added to adjust the four seasons.

信饬百官，众功皆兴。
在帝尧的严格要求下，百官各尽其责，于是各方面都呈现一派兴旺发达的景象。
Authentic directions were given to the various officers, and their several labours commenced.

尧曰：“谁可顺此事？”
帝尧问群臣说：“谁可以继承我的事业？”
Yao said, 'Who can obediently manage these matters?'

放齐曰：“嗣子丹朱开明。”
放齐说：“你的长子丹朱英明通达，可以继承。”
Fangqi said, 'There is your adopted son Danzhu, who is developing his intelligence.'

尧曰：“吁！顽凶，不用。”
帝尧说：“哼，这孩子心既愚顽又好争讼，不能用。”
Yao said, 'Oh! he is unscrupulous and wicked; I cannot employ him.'

尧又曰：“谁可者？”
（帝尧）又问：“谁可以继承此位？”
He said again, 'Who will do it?'

谨兜曰：“共工旁聚布功，可用。”
谨兜说：“共工能调集人力，能兴办事业，可以继承此位！”
Huandou said, 'The minister of works, who is generally popular, and has displayed merit, could be employed.'

尧曰：“共工善言，其用僻，似恭漫天，不可。”
帝尧说：“共工好夸夸其谈，做事不循正道，貌似虔敬而实则傲慢，不能用。”
Yao said, 'The minister of works is talkative; if he is employed, his depravities, although he is apparently respectful, would overspread the heavens, he will not do.'

尧又曰：“嗟，四岳，汤汤洪水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民其忧，有能使治者？”
帝尧又问四方诸侯之长：“嗨，你们四方诸侯之长，如今洪水滔天，包围着高山，淹没了丘陵，黎民百姓都为此忧伤，你们说说，谁能担此治水的重任？”
He said further, 'Alas! O president of the four mountains, the waters of the flood rise up to heaven, and in their vast expanse encompass the mountains, and overtop the hills; the common people are troubled about it. Is there a capable man whom I could set to deal with the matter?'

皆曰鲧可。
四方诸侯之长都说鲧可以任用。
They all said, 'Gun might do it.'

尧曰：“鲧负命毁族，不可。”
帝尧说：“鲧常违抗命令，伤害同僚，不能用。”
Yao said, 'Gun disobeys orders, and ruins his companions. He will not do.'

岳曰：“异哉，试不可用而已。”
四方诸侯之长说：“不会吧，他似乎不像你说的那样。先试试吧，不行再撤换。”
The President said, 'Ah! well! try him, and if he is found useless, have done with him.'

尧于是听岳用鲧。
帝尧于是听从他们的话，试着用鲧治水。
Whereupon Yao adopting his suggestion, employed Gun.

九岁，功用不成。
结果治水九年，一无所成。
for nine years, but his work was not completed.

尧曰：“嗟！四岳：朕在位七十载，汝能庸命，践朕位？”
帝尧说：“喂，你们四方诸侯之长，我在位七十年了，你们当中谁能顺应天命，继承我的帝位呢？”
Yao said, 'Alas! 7O president of the four mountains, I have been on the throne seventy years; you are able to carry out the decrees, do you occupy my throne.'

岳应曰：“鄙德忝帝位。”
四方诸侯之长说：“我们的品德微薄，不敢辱没帝位。”
The president replied, 'My moral qualities are of such a low order that I should disgrace the Imperial throne.'

尧曰：“悉举贵戚及疏远隐匿者。”
帝尧说：“你们也可以从在朝的亲贵或被疏远的隐士当中推荐。”
Yao said, 'You must all recommend one of your esteemed relations, or even an obscure stranger.'

众皆言于尧曰：“有矜在民间，曰虞舜。”
于是大家都说：“民间有个单身汉，名叫虞舜。”
All the courtiers said to Yao, 'There is an unmarried man of the lower orders called Shun of Yu.'

尧曰：“然，朕闻之。其何如？”
帝尧说：“对，我听说过，这人怎样？”
Yao said, 'Yes, I have heard of him, what is he like?'

岳曰：“盲者子。父顽，母嚣，弟傲，能和以孝，烝烝治，不至奸。”
四方诸侯之长说：“他是一个盲人的儿子，他的父亲不讲德义，他的母亲不讲忠信，他的弟弟狂傲无礼；但他仍能很孝顺、很友爱地和他们共处，能非常温厚善良地感化他们而不和他们冲突。”
The president said, 'He is the son of a blind man; his father was unprincipled, his mother insincere, and his brother arrogant, but he managed by his dutiful conduct to be reconciled to them, so they have gradually improved, and not been extremely wicked.'

尧曰：“吾其试哉。”
帝尧说：“那就先让我考验考验他。”
Yao said,'Shall I try him?' said Yao.

于是尧妻之二女,观其德于二女。
于是尧把自己的两个女儿嫁给了舜做妻子，通过这两个女儿来观察舜的德行。
He then married his two daughters to Shun, and watched his behaviour towards them.

舜饬下二女于妫汭,如妇礼。
舜打发这两个女人回家侍奉公婆，这两个女人都能按照舜的教导在虞家恪守妇道。
Shun sent the two women down to the north of the Gui river, and treated them with the ceremony due to them as his wives.

尧善之，乃使舜慎和五典,五典能从。
尧认为舜做得很好，就让舜认真地制订“五常”之规，以教化百姓，百姓都能遵从。
Yao praised Shun, and told him to carefully harmonize the five human relationships and when they could be obeyed.

乃遍入百官,百官时序。
于是又让他入朝治百官，百官因而有了秩序，能各居其位，各司其职。
These became universal among the various officials, who at the proper times arranged the visitors at the four gates in the right order

宾于四门,四门穆穆,诸侯远方宾客皆敬。
让他主管外交，接待四方来宾，而舜又能让各国的使臣们心悦诚服，各地的诸侯、宾客对他都十分恭敬。
and when the visitors at the four gates were submissive, the princes and strangers from distant regions became one and all respectful.

尧使舜入山林川泽，暴风雷雨，舜行不迷。
尧让舜视察山川水泽，正好遇到暴风雨，舜竟能不迷路。
Yao sent Shun into the hills and forests among rivers and swamps, but although fierce winds and thunderstorms prevailed, Shun did not miss his way.

尧以为圣，召舜曰：“女谋事至而言可绩,三年矣。女登帝位。”
尧认为舜确实很神圣，便把他叫回来对他说：“你办事成功，说到做到，三年来很有成绩。你可以登天子之位。”
Yao then taking Shun to be a holy man, called him and said, 'For three years your deliberations have been excellent, and I have found that your words can be carried into practice. You shall ascend the Imperial throne.'

舜让于德不怿。
舜推辞自己的德行不够，深感不能胜任。
Shun yielded in favour of some one more virtuous than himself, and was unhappy,

正月上日，舜受终于文祖。
正月初一，舜不得已终于在文祖庙接受了尧的禅让。
but on the first day of the first month Shun accepted Yao's resignation in the temple of the accomplished ancestor,

文祖者，尧大祖也。
文祖，就是尧的太祖。
who was Yao's great ancestor.

于是帝尧老，命舜摄行天子之政，以观天命。
从此帝尧退位，让舜代行天子之政，以此观察上天的反应。
The Emperor Yao being old ordered that Shun should be associated with him in the government of the Empire in order to observe Heaven's decrees.

舜乃在璇玑玉衡，以齐七政。
舜于是通过璇玑玉衡以观察日月五星的运行是否正常。
Shun thereupon examined the gem-adorned armillary sphere, and the jade transverse, so as to adjust the position of the 'Seven Directors.'

遂类于上帝，禋于六宗，望于山川，辩于群神。（注：原文“種于六宗”应为“禋于六宗”，“禋”为祭祀礼名，结合语义与白话文“对上天、六宗、山川以及冈峦丘陵都进行了祭祀”修正）
他对上天、六宗、山川以及冈峦丘陵都进行了祭祀。
He then offered a special sacrifice to the Supreme Ruler, sacrificed purely to the six honoured ones, looked with devotion to the hills and rivers, and worshipped with distinctive rites the hosts of spirits.

揖五瑞，择吉月日，见四岳诸牧，班瑞。
他选择吉日召集群臣百官，把各位诸侯的瑞玉收起来复核一遍，重又颁发下去。
He called in the five tokens, chose a lucky month and day, gave audience to the president of the four mountains, and all the governors, returning the tokens in due course.

岁二月，东巡狩，至于岱宗，柴，望秩于山川。遂见东方君长，合时月正日，同律度量衡，修五礼五玉三帛二生一死为挚，如五器，卒乃复。
同年二月，舜到东方各地巡视，他登上泰山，祭祀了泰山，又遥望四方的名山大川按等级一一进行了祭祀。他会见东方诸侯，向诸侯们颁布了新历法，统一了乐律与度量衡，制定了五种礼节，规定了五个等级的诸侯所执的不同珪玉，以及不同等级的官员见面时所持的礼物，如彩色丝帛、牲畜活物以及野鸡的羽毛等，如果是玉器，行礼完毕时要退还给对方。
In the second month of every year he went eastward on a tour of inspection, and on reaching Daizong he presented a burnt-offering, and sacrificed in order to the hills and rivers. He then gave audience to the chieftains of the East, putting in accord their seasons and months, and rectifying the days. He rendered uniform the standard tubes, the measures of length and capacity, and the scales; and regulated the five kinds of ceremonies. The five gems, the three kinds of silks, the two living animals, and one dead one were brought as presents to the audience, but the five implements were returned at the conclusion.

五月，南巡狩；八月，西巡狩；十一月，北巡狩：皆如初。
这年的五月，舜到南方巡视；八月，到西方巡视；十一月，到北方巡视，所有活动内容与上述相同。
In the fifth month he went to the south, in the eighth month to the west, and in the eleventh month northward on his tours of inspection; in each case observing the same ceremonies as before.

归，至于祖祢庙，用特牛礼。
舜回到京城，到文祖庙向先祖汇报，祭品是一条公牛。
and on his return he went to the temple of the ancestral tablets, and offered up a single ox.

五岁一巡狩，群后四朝。遍告以言，明试以功，车服以庸。
从此规定，天子每隔五年出巡一次，其中四年，诸侯进京朝拜。天子要明白准确地向诸侯提出要求，公开考察他们的政绩，用不同的车马服饰来奖赏他们的功勋。
Every five years there was one tour of inspection, and four audiences of the princes at court, when they presented a full verbal report, which was intelligently tested by their works, and chariots and robes given according to their deserts.

肇十有二州，决川。
舜将中国的国土划分为十二州，疏通了各州的河道。
Shun instituted the division of the Empire into twelve provinces, and deepened the rivers.

象以典刑，流宥五刑，鞭作官刑，扑作教刑，金作赎刑。
舜以图画的形式公布了各种刑法，对犯了五种刑法的罪犯视其情节该流放的流放，该赦免的赦免。在官场上对犯罪者抽鞭子，在学校里对犯规者打板子，有些犯罪可以用金钱赎免。
He gave delineations of the statutory punishments, enacting banishment as a mitigation of the five chief punishments, the whip being employed for public officers, the stick in schools, and a money penalty being inflicted for redeemable crimes.

眚灾过，赦；怙终贼，刑。对那些非故意的过失犯罪可以宽恕，对那些怙恶不悛的分子则严加惩处。
Inadvertent offences, and those caused by misfortune were to be pardoned, and those who offended presumptuously or repeatedly were to be punished with death.

钦哉，钦哉，惟刑之静哉！
慎重啊，慎重啊，执法行刑一定要慎重思虑。
'Be reverent, be reverent' (said he), 'and in the administration of the law be tranquil.'

谨兜进言共工,尧曰不可，而试之工师,共工果淫辟。
谨兜举荐共工为接班人，尧说“不行”,让他试任工师之职，共工果然荒淫邪恶。
Huandou approached, and spoke about the minister of works. 'I cannot even give him a trial as a workman,' said Yao, 'for he is really profligate.'

四岳举鲧治鸿水，尧以为不可，岳强请试之，试之而无功，故百姓不便。
四方诸侯之长举荐鲧治理洪水，尧认为他不合适，四方诸侯之长一再请求试用，结果一无所成，使黎民大受其害。
The president of the four mountains recommended Gun as the proper person to look after the deluge. Yao regarded it as impracticable, but the president vehemently requested that he might be tried, so the trial was made, but without good results.

三苗在江淮、荆州数为乱。
后来又有三苗在江淮、荆州一带多次作乱。
Of old the people had felt that it was undesirable that the three Miao tribes in the districts of Jiang Huai, and Jing should so often rise in rebellion;

于是舜归而言于帝，请流共工于幽陵,以变北狄;放谨兜于崇山,以变南蛮；迁三苗于三危,以变西戎；殛鲧于羽山,以变东夷：
于是舜巡视归来向尧建议，请求把共工流放到幽陵，让他去改变北狄的风俗；把谨兜流放到崇山，让他去改变南蛮的风俗；把三苗迁往三危，让他去改变西戎的风俗；把鲧发配到羽山，让他去改变东夷的风俗。
so Shun on his return spoke to the emperor requesting that the minister of works might be banished to the ridge of Yu to reform the Northern Ti tribes, that Huandou might be detained on mount Chong, to reform the Southern barbarians, that the chief of the three Miao tribes might be removed to Sanwei (three cliffs) to reform the Western Rong people, and that Gun might be imprisoned for life on Mount Yu to reform the Eastern barbarians.

四罪而天下咸服。
惩办了这四个罪人，天下都感到心服。
These four criminals being thus dealt with, universal submission prevailed throughout the empire.

尧立七十年得舜，二十年而老，令舜摄行天子之政，荐之于天。
尧在位七十年得到了舜，二十年后退位，让舜代行天子之政，把舜推荐给上天。
Yao had sat on the throne seventy years, when he secured Shun's services for twenty years; then, being old, he directed that Shun should be associated with him in the government of the empire, and presented him to Heaven.

尧辟位凡二十八年而崩。
尧离开帝位二十八年后去世。
Yao had abdicated the throne twenty-eight years when he died,

百姓悲哀，如丧父母。三年，四方莫举乐，以思尧。
去世时百姓哀痛得就像死了父母。为了悼念帝尧，天下四方三年之内不演奏音乐。
and the people mourned for him as for a parent, no music being played for three years throughout the empire, for which reason he was remembered.

尧知子丹朱之不肖，不足授天下，于是乃权授舜。
尧知道自己的儿子丹朱不成材，不足以把天下交给他，因而采用变通的做法，把天下交给了舜。
Yao knew that his son Danzhu was a worthless fellow, who was not fit to reign, and so the authority was conferred on Shun.

授舜，则天下得其利而丹朱病；授丹朱，则天下病而丹朱得其利。
交给舜可使天下人得利而只对丹朱一人不利；交给丹朱则对天下人不利而只对丹朱一人有利。
As it was conferred on Shun, the empire got the advantage and Danzhu was injured. If it had been conferred on Danzhu, the empire would have been injured, and Danzhu gained the advantage.

尧曰“终不以天下之病而利一人”，而卒授舜以天下。
尧说“怎么也不能让天下人受害而让一个人得利”，于是便毅然地将天下交给了舜。
Yao said, 'We certainly cannot cause the empire to suffer loss, and the advantage go to an individual.' In the end the empire was given over to Shun.

尧崩，三年之丧毕，舜让辟丹朱于南河之南。
尧死后，三年守丧结束，为了让位给丹朱，舜躲避到了黄河的南边。
After the death of Yao, when the three years' mourning was over, Shun gave way to Danzhu, and retired to the south of the southern river.

诸侯朝觐者不之丹朱而之舜，狱讼者不之丹朱而之舜，讴歌者不讴歌丹朱而讴歌舜。
可是前来朝贡的诸侯们都不去丹朱那里而到舜这边来；打官司的都不去找丹朱而去找舜；唱颂歌的不歌颂丹朱而歌颂舜。
When the princes went to an audience at court, they did not present themselves before Danzhu, but before Shun; litigants did not go before Danzhu, but Shun; and the singers did not sing in praise of Danzhu, but of Shun.

舜曰“天也”，夫而后之中国践天子位焉，是为帝舜。
舜说“这是天意所在啊”，于是回到京师即天子之位，这就是帝舜。
Shun said, 'It is from Heaven.' Afterwards he went to the capital, sat on the Imperial throne, and was styled Emperor Shun.

虞舜者，名曰重华。重华父曰瞽叟,瞽叟父曰桥牛，桥牛父曰句望，句望父曰敬康，敬康父曰穷蝉，穷蝉父曰帝颛顼，颛顼父曰昌意：以至舜七世矣。
虞舜名叫重华。重华的父亲叫瞽叟，瞽叟的父亲叫桥牛，桥牛的父亲叫句望，句望的父亲叫敬康，敬康的父亲叫穷蝉，穷蝉的父亲叫颛顼，颛顼的父亲叫昌意，从昌意到舜共七代。
Shun of Yu was named Chonghua (double splendour); Chonghua's father was Gusou; Gusou's father was Qiaoniu (bridge cow); Qiaoniu's father was Juwang; Juwang's father was Jingkang; Jingkang's father was Qiongchan; Qiongchan's father was Emperor Zhuanxu; Zhuanxu's father was Changyi. From him to Shun we have seven generations.

自从穷蝉以至帝舜，皆微为庶人。
从穷蝉到舜，都是不知名的普通百姓。
From Qiongchan to Emperor Shun they were all insignificant common people.

舜父瞽叟盲，而舜母死，瞽叟更娶妻而生象，象傲。
舜的父亲瞽叟是个盲人，舜的母亲死后，瞽叟又娶了一个老婆，后妻生了个儿子叫象，象为人傲慢。
Shun's father, Gusou, was blind, and his mother having died, Gusou married again and had a son, Xiang, who was arrogant.

瞽叟爱后妻子，常欲杀舜，舜避逃；及有小过，则受罪。顺事父及后母与弟，日以笃谨，匪有解。
但瞽叟宠爱后妻之子，常想杀舜，舜则总是躲着他。如果惩罚不重时，也就委屈地忍受了。他顺从地侍候着父亲、后母和弟弟，每天谦恭谨慎，从不怠慢。
Gusou loved his second wife, and frequently tried to kill Shun, who avoided him; when he made slight mistakes he was punished, yet he obediently served his father, stepmother, and brother, and was day by day generous , careful, and never negligent.

舜，冀州之人也。舜耕历山,渔雷泽,陶河滨,作什器于寿丘,就时于负夏。
舜是冀州人士，曾在历山种田，在雷泽捕鱼，在黄河边上制作陶器，在寿丘制造各种生产生活用品，还在负夏从事过商业活动。
Shun was a native of Jizhou, ploughed on Li mountain, fished in Thunder lake, made pots on the bank of the river, fashioned various articles at Shouqiu, and went now and then to Fuxia.

舜父瞽叟顽，母嚣，弟象傲，皆欲杀舜。舜顺适不失子道,兄弟孝慈。欲杀，不可得；即求，尝在侧。
他的父亲瞽叟不讲道义，后母不讲忠信，弟弟傲慢无礼，都想杀死舜。而舜则顺应父母心意，不失为子之道，对于那个狠毒狂傲的弟弟也很友善。这就让其父其弟找不到杀他的借口，其父其弟何时想找舜，舜又总是在他们的身边。
Shun's father, Gusou, was unprincipled, his mother insincere, and his brother, Xiang, arrogant. They all tried to kill Shun, who was obedient, and never by chance failed in his duty as a son, or his fraternal love. Though they tried to kill him they did not succeed, and when they sought him he got out of the way.

舜年二十以孝闻。
舜从二十岁就以孝顺出名。
When Shun was twenty years old he was noted for his filial piety,

三十而帝尧问可用者，四岳咸荐虞舜，曰可。
三十岁时尧问谁可以继天子之位，四方诸侯之长全都举荐了舜，说他可以继承帝位。
and when he was thirty the Emperor Yao asked if he was fit to reign. The presidents united in bringing Shun of Yu forward as an able man,

于是尧乃以二女妻舜以观其内，使九男与处以观其外。
于是帝尧就将自己的两个女儿嫁给了舜，以观察舜治家的能力；又让自己的九个儿子与他交往，以观察他处理外部事务的能力。
so Yao gave him his two daughters in marriage in order to observe his conduct at home, and bade his nine sons put him in charge of a post so as to note his behaviour abroad.

舜居妫汭，内行弥谨。
舜家住在妫汭，他在家族内部的表现非常严谨。
Shun lived within the bend of the Kuei river, and was especially careful.

尧二女不敢以贵骄，事舜亲戚甚有妇道。尧九男皆益笃。
尧的两个女儿都不敢因出身高贵而在舜的家中稍有怠慢，侍奉舜的父母很守妇道；尧的九个儿子在舜的影响下也变得愈发稳重厚道。
Yao's two daughters did not dare, on account of their rank, to be proud, but waited on Shun's relations, and were constant in their wifely duties, while Yao's nine sons became more and more generous.

舜耕历山，历山之人皆让畔；渔雷泽，雷泽上人皆让居；陶河滨，河滨器皆不苦窟。（注：“苦窟”应为“苦窳”，指器物粗劣不坚固）
舜在历山务农，历山的人从来没有地界纠纷；舜在雷泽捕鱼，泽中的渔民常互相谦让住处；舜在河边制陶，影响了那里的制陶者从来不卖次品。
When Shun ploughed on Li mountain, the inhabitants yielded the boundaries; when he fished in Thunder lake, the men on the lake yielded to him the best place; and when he made pots on the bank of the river, his vessels had no holes or flaws in them.

一年而所居成聚，二年成邑，三年成都。
舜在哪里住上一年，那里就会形成村落；住上两年，那里就成了市镇；住上三年，那里就成了都城。
If he dwelt in a place for a year he formed an assemblage, in two years it became a town, and in three a metropolis.

尧乃赐舜缔衣，与琴，为筑仓廪，予牛羊。
尧赐给舜上等布衣一套、琴一把，并且为他修建了粮仓，送给他一些牛羊。
Yao gave Shun clothes made of fine grass-cloth, and a lute, and built him a granary and shed for his oxen and sheep.

瞽叟尚复欲杀之，使舜上涂廪，瞽叟从下纵火焚廪。舜乃以两笠自扞而下，去，得不死。
可是瞽叟到这时还是总想置舜于死地，他让舜到仓顶上抹泥，而他却在底下放火。舜是靠着两顶草帽从上面跳了下来，没有被烧死。
Gusou again tried to kill Shun by making him go up and plaster the roof of the granary, while he set fire to it from below, but Shun, protecting himself from the fire with a couple of bamboo hats, came down and escaped with his life.

后瞽叟又使舜穿井，舜穿井为匿空旁出。舜既入深，瞽叟与象共下土实井，舜从匿空出，去。
后来瞽叟又让舜去挖井，舜知道危险，便预先在井中挖了个秘密通道。待至井挖深了，瞽叟和象便一齐往井里填土，没想到舜早从秘密通道逃走了。
Gusou after this told Shun to dig a well, which he did, making a secret tunnel at the side to get out at. When Shun had gone right in, Gusou and Xiang filled up the well with earth, but Shun came out by the secret passage.

瞽叟、象喜，以舜为已死。象曰：“本谋者象。”
瞽叟与象挺高兴，以为舜已被埋在井中。象说：“这个主意是我想出来的。”
Gusou and Xiang rejoiced, thinking that Shun was dead, and Xiang said, 'The plot was mine,'

象与其父母分，于是曰：“舜妻尧二女，与琴，象取之。牛羊仓廪予父母。”
他要与父母瓜分舜的财产。他说：“舜的两个妻子和那把琴归我，牛羊和粮仓归你俩。”
'but I will go shares with my father and mother; I will take Shun's wives, Yao's two daughters, and the lute as my share, while the oxen, sheep, granary and shed shall belong to my parents.'

象乃止舜宫居，鼓其琴。舜往见之。象鄂不怿，曰：“我思舜，正郁陶！”
象于是住进了舜的房子，坐在里面弹琴取乐。没想到这时舜又回来了，象既惊愕，又很尴尬，他说：“我正在想你想得很伤心呢!”
He remained, however, in Shun's house playing on the lute, and when Shun went thither Xiang, startled and not well-pleased to see him, said, 'I was just thinking of you, and getting very anxious.'

舜曰：“然，尔其庶矣！”（注：原文“四”为衍文，应为“矣”，意为“是啊，你我的兄弟情谊也该是这样的！”）
舜说：“是啊，你我的兄弟情谊很不错啊!”
'Quite so,' said Shun, 'and so you possessed yourself of all these things.'（注：英文译文侧重“你已然占有了这些东西”，核心语义与“兄弟情谊”的表述存在细微差异，但整体围绕舜面对象的伪装时的回应，符合上下文逻辑）

舜复事瞽叟爱弟弥谨。
事后，舜侍奉父亲依然恭谨，对待弟弟依然友爱。
Shun again served Gusou, loved his brother, and was still more careful in his conduct.

于是尧乃试舜五典百官，皆治。
于是尧就试着让舜制定五典，教化民众，治理百官。舜都做得很好。
Yao thereupon tested Shun as to the five cardinal rules, and the various officers were under control.

昔高阳氏有才子八人，世得其利，谓之“八恺”。高辛氏有才子八人，世谓之“八元”。
当年高阳氏有八位有才能的人，替世人做了许多好事，人们称他们为“八恺”。高辛氏有八个有才能的人，世人称他们为“八元”。
In former days the Emperor Gaoyang had eight talented sons; the world benefited by them, and they were called the eight benevolent ones. The Emperor Gaoxin had also eight talented sons, and men called them the eight virtuous ones.

此十六族者,世济其美,不陨其名。至于尧，尧未能举。
这十六个家族，世世代代都能保持他们的美德，没有辱没他们先人的名声，一直到尧的时代仍是如此，但尧却没有起用他们。
Of these sixteen men after ages have acknowledged the excellence, and not let their names fall to the ground. In the time of Yao he was not able to raise them to office,

舜举八恺，使主后土,以揆百事,莫不时序。举八元，使布五教于四方,父义，母慈，兄友，弟恭，子孝，内平外成。
于是舜起用“八恺”,让他们主管大地上的水利、农作诸事，结果他们都管理得井井有条。舜同时任用“八元”,让他们主管国家的教育、教化，结果整个社会变得为父者义、为母者慈、为兄者友、为弟者恭、为子者孝，使得国内太平，四周的夷狄都被教化得守规懂礼。
but Shun raised the eight benevolent ones to office, and made them superintend the land department and direct all matters, arranging them according to their seasons. He also raised the right virtuous ones to office, employing them to spread throughout the country a knowledge of the duties pertaining to the five social relationships, for fathers became just, mothers loving, elder brothers sociable, younger ones respectful, and children dutiful; within the empire there was peace, and beyond it submission.

昔帝鸿氏有不才子，掩义隐贼，好行凶慝，天下谓之浑沌。少昊氏有不才子，毁信恶忠，崇饰恶言，天下谓之穷奇。颛顼氏有不才子，不可教训，不知话言，天下谓之梼杌。此三族世忧之。至于尧，尧未能去。（注：原文“少睥氏”应为“少昊氏”，“祷杌”应为“梼杌”，均按经典文本与语义修正）
从前帝鸿氏有个不成材的子弟，他袒护坏人，行凶作恶，人们管他叫混沌；少昊氏有个不成材的子弟，他妒能忌贤，诽谤他人，粉饰错误，人们管他叫穷奇；颛顼氏有个不成材的子弟，他不知好歹，不懂人话，无法教育，人们管他叫梼杌，这三个家族成为世人的祸患，直到尧的时代还未能把他们除掉。
In ancient days the Emperor Hong (Huangdi) had a son devoid of ability, who shut himself off from duty, and was a villain in secret, delighting in the practice of the worst vices, and all men called him Hundun (Chaos). (The Emperor) Shaohao had a descendant devoid of ability, who overthrew good faith, hated loyalty, extolled specious and evil talk, and all the people called him Qiongji (Monster). Zhuanxu had a son devoid of ability, who would receive no instruction and acknowledge no good words, and all the people called him Taowu (Block). These three men everyone was distressed about until the time of Yao, but Yao could not send them away.

缙云氏有不才子，贪于饮食，冒于货贿，天下谓之饕餮。天下恶之，比之三凶。
缙云氏有个不成材的子弟，好吃好喝，贪污受贿，天下人管他叫饕餮。大家都讨厌他，认为他与前面“三凶”没有什么两样。
Jinyun had a son devoid of ability, who was greedy in eating and drinking, and pursued wealth blindly. All the people called him Taotie (Glutton), hated and compared him to the three other wicked men.

舜宾于四门，乃流四凶族，迁于四裔，以御螭魅，于是四门辟，言毋凶人也。
舜为了敞开国都四门以迎接四方贤者，就将这四个凶顽的家族流放到了边远的地方，让他们去抵御远方的妖魔鬼怪。从此国都的四门大开，因为国内已经没有为非作歹的坏人了。
Shun received visitors at the four gates, but banished these four wicked ones to the four borders of the empire to manage hobgoblins; and those at the four gates rightly said there were no wicked men among them.

舜入于大麓，烈风雷雨不迷，尧乃知舜之足授天下。
由于舜能进入深山遇暴风雨而不迷路，因而尧知道舜是个贤才，可以将天下交给他。
Shun went to the great plains at the foot of the mountains, and, amid violent wind, thunder, and rain, did not go astray. Yao then knew that Shun was fit to accept the empire.

尧老，使舜摄行天子政，巡狩。
尧退位后，让舜代行天子之政，让舜出外巡视。
and being old, caused Shun to be associated with him in the government, and when he went on a tour of inspection.

舜得举用事二十年，而尧使摄政。摄政八年而尧崩。三年丧毕，让丹朱，天下归舜。
舜被选拔任职二十年后代尧摄政，代行天子之权八年后尧去世。三年守丧结束，舜推让天子之位给丹朱，但天下人心都归向舜。
Shun was promoted and employed in the administration of affairs for twenty years; and Yao having directed that he should be associated in the government, he was so associated for eight years. Yao died, and when the three years' mourning was over, Shun yielded to Danzhu, but the people of the empire turned to Shun.

而禹、皋陶、契、后稷、伯夷、夔、龙、锤、益、彭祖自尧时而皆举用，未有分职。
当时禹、皋陶、契、后稷、伯夷、夔、龙、便、益、彭祖等人，虽从帝尧时代就被选拔任用，但却始终没有明确的职务分工。
Now Yu, Gaoyao, Xie, Houji, Boyi, Kui, Long, Chui Yi, and Pengzu were all from the time of Yao promoted to office, but had not separate appointments.

于是舜乃至于文祖，谋于四岳，辟四门，明通四方耳目，命十二牧论帝德，行厚德，远佞人，则蛮夷率服。
于是舜把四方诸侯之长召集到文祖庙与他们商量，同时敞开京城的四门，广迎四方贤人，广泛听取各方面的意见。舜让十二州的州长发扬光大帝尧之德，让他们广施仁政，不要靠近那花言巧语的小人，只有这样才能让四方的蛮夷都来归服。
Shun having then proceeded to the temple of the accomplished ancestor, deliberated with the president of the four mountains, threw open the four gates, and was in direct communication with officers in all four quarters of the empire, who were eyes and ears to him. He ordered the twelve governors to talk of the Emperor's virtue, to be kind to the virtuous, and keep the artful at a distance, so that the barbarians of the south might lead on one another to be submissive.

舜谓四岳曰：“有能奋庸美尧之事者，使居官相事？”
舜对四方诸侯之长说：“谁能努力工作，发扬光大尧的事业，我将让他位居首辅，佐我治理天下。有这样的人吗？”
He said to the president of the four mountains, 'Is there anyone who can vigorously display his merits, and beautify Yao's undertakings, and whom I can make prime minister?'

皆曰：“伯禹为司空，可美帝功。”
大家都说：“让禹担任司空，可以光大尧的功业。”
They all said, 'There is Baron Yu, the superintendent of works,' he can beautify the Emperor's labours.

舜曰：“嗟，然！禹，汝平水土，维是勉哉。”
舜说：“嗯，是的!禹，你去治理洪水以及整治有关水土的事。这事你可要尽心竭力地做啊!”
Shun said, 'Ah! yes, Yu, you have put in order the water and the land, but in this matter you must exert yourself.'

禹拜稽首，让于稷、契与皋陶。
禹下拜磕头，推让给稷、契与皋陶。
Yu did obeisance with his head to the ground, while declining in favour of Hou Ji (Millet), Xie, or Gaoyao.

舜曰：“然，往矣。”
舜说：“你推荐得不错，这事还是你去干吧!”
Shun said, 'Yes; but do you go and set about it.'

舜曰：“弃，黎民始饥，汝后稷，播时百谷。”
舜又说：“弃，百姓正在挨饿，你去主管农业，负责播种谷物。”
Shun said, 'Qi, the black-haired people begin to be famished. Do you, Prince Millet, sow in their seasons the various kinds of grain.'

舜曰：“契，百姓不亲，五品不驯，汝为司徒，而敬敷五教，在宽。”
舜又说：“契，百姓不和睦，伦常乱了套，你去担任司徒，认真地对百姓进行五种伦常关系的教育，要注意以宽厚为原则。”
He also said, 'Xie, the people do not love one another, and the five orders of relationship are not observed. You, as minister of instruction, must carefully diffuse abroad those five lessons of duty, but do so with gentleness.'

舜曰：“皋陶，蛮夷猾夏，寇贼奸轨，汝作士，五刑有服，五服三就；五流有度，五度三居：维明能信。”
舜又说：“皋陶，蛮夷侵扰中国，盗贼犯法横行，你去充当法官，五刑要使用得当，对于犯罪的人要在规定的场所用刑；五刑如改为流放则其远近应有规定的里程；五种不同程度的流放，应安置在三种不同的场所。总之只有执法严明，才能取得人们的信任。”
He also said, 'Gaoyao, the southern barbarians are disturbing the summer region, while robbers, murderers, villains, and traitors abound. Do you, as minister of crime, exercise repression by use of the five kinds of punishment—for the infliction of which there are three appointed places—and the five banishments with their several places of detention, and the three degrees of distance. Be intelligent and you will inspire confidence.'

舜曰：“谁能驯予工？”皆曰垂可。于是以垂为共工。
舜又说：“谁能管理百工事务？”大家都说垂可以担任，于是任命垂为共工。
Shun said, 'Who can direct the workmen?' They all said 'Chui can do it'; so he made Chui minister of works.

舜曰：“谁能驯予上下草木鸟兽？”皆曰益可。于是以益为朕虞。
舜又说：“谁能帮我管理山泽草木鸟兽之事？”大家都说益能胜任，于是舜就任命益做主管山林畜牧之官。
Shun said, 'Who can superintend my uplands and lowlands, pastures and woods, birds and beasts?' They all said, 'Yi is the man'; so Yi was made imperial forester.

益拜稽首，让于诸臣朱虎、熊罴。
益下拜稽首，推让给朱虎、熊罴。
Yi did obeisance with his head to the ground, and declined in favour of the officials Fir, Tiger, Black Bear, and Grizzly Bear.

舜曰：“往矣，汝谐。”遂以朱虎、熊罴为佐。
舜说：“上任去吧，你和他们一起去。”于是就让朱虎、熊罴给益当助手。
Shun said, 'Go and act harmoniously.' Fir, Tiger, Black Bear, and Grizzly Bear were accordingly his assistants.

舜曰：“嗟！四岳，有能典朕三礼？”皆曰伯夷可。
舜又说：“四方诸侯之长，有能帮我主管天、地、人三种礼仪之事的人吗？”大家都说伯夷可以。
Shun said, 'Ah! president of the four mountains, is there anyone who can superintend the three ceremonies?' They all said, 'Baron Yi is the man.'

舜曰：“嗟！伯夷，以汝为秩宗，夙夜维敬，直哉维静絜。”
舜说：“喂，伯夷!任命你为秩宗，你要昼夜一贯地保持虔诚，无论朝中典庆还是郊庙祭祀，都要做到正直而清明。”
Shun said, 'Ah! Baron Yi, I will make you arranger of the ancestral temple. Day and night be careful, be upright, be pure.'

伯夷让夔、龙。舜曰：“然。以夔为典乐，教稚子，直而温，宽而栗，刚而毋虐，简而毋傲；诗言意，歌长言，声依永，律和声，八音能谐，毋相夺伦，神人以和。”
伯夷推让给夔、龙。舜说：“好吧，我让夔当乐官，专教贵族子弟，要让他们从小具有正直而温和、宽厚而严肃、刚强而不苛刻、简约而不傲慢的品德。诗是表达人的心意的，歌是一种拖长声音的语言，歌声的长短高低要根据语句拉长的需要，歌曲使用何调何律要与本诗本声的要求相和，各种乐器的配合使用要注意和谐，不要相互抵触、出现噪音，要让受祭祀的神灵与在座的听众都感到愉悦平和。”
Baron Yi declined in favour of Kui or Long, but Shun said, 'Let it be so,' and made Kui director of music and teacher of youth. 'Be straightforward' (he added) 'and yet mild; lenient and yet stern; firm, yet not tyrannical; impetuous, yet not arrogant. Poetry gives expression to the thought, and singing is the prolonged utterance of that expression. Notes accompany that utterance, and are harmonized themselves by the pitch-pipes. The eight kinds of instruments can be adjusted, so that one shall not take from or interfere with another, and spirits and men are thereby brought into harmony.'

夔曰：“於！予击石拊石，百兽率舞。”
夔说：“好，我敲起石磬能使百兽相率起舞。”
Kui said, 'Oh! I smite the stone; I tap the stone, and the various animals lead on one another to dance.'

舜曰：“龙，朕畏忌谗说殄伪，振惊朕众，命汝为纳言，夙夜出入朕命，惟信。”
舜又说：“龙，我最厌恶那些华而不实、哗众取宠的言行，它能迷惑民众的视听，我任命你管理群臣的进言，负责上传下达，你一定要做到诚实不虚。”
Shun said, 'Long, I dread slanderous speakers and injurious deceivers, who agitate and alarm my people. I appoint you minister of communication. Day and night you will issue and receive my orders, but be truthful.'

舜曰：“嗟！女二十有二人，敬哉，惟时相天事。”
最后，舜告诫众人说：“你们二十二人，一定要恭谨从事，要不失时宜地做好自己的工作。”
Shun said, 'Ah! you twenty and two men, be reverent, and you will aid in their proper seasons the undertakings of heaven.'

三岁一考功，三考绌陟，远近众功咸兴。
舜规定对诸侯百官都要三年一考核，通过三次考核决定官员的升降。于是不论远近，各方面的工作都兴旺发达。
Every three years there was an examination of merits, and after three examinations there were degradations and promotions both far and near. The people's labours generally prospered,

分北三苗。
（舜）并对三苗部落进行了分化迁徙。
while the people of the three Miao tribes were divided and defeated.

此二十二人咸成厥功：皋陶为大理，平,民各伏得其实;伯夷主礼，上下咸让；垂主工师,百工致功；益主虞，山泽辟;弃主稷，百谷时茂;契主司徒，百姓亲和；龙主宾客,远人至；十二牧行而九州莫敢辟违;唯禹之功为大，披九山，通九泽，决九河，定九州,各以其职来贡,不失厥宜。
二十二人在功业上都各有建树：皋陶当法官，司法公平，被定罪的人都很服气；伯夷主管礼仪，朝廷上下无不礼让；垂主管土木建筑和手工制作，做出了很好的劳动成绩；益主管林牧，山林水泽的资源得到了开发；弃主管农业，各种谷物都种得及时，长得茂盛；契主管政教，百姓都亲爱和睦；龙主管接待宾客，远方的人都来朝拜；十二州的州长奉法行事没有一个敢为非作歹。在这当中禹的功劳最大，他开山泄洪，引流成泊，疏通江河，划定了各州的疆界，并规定了各州对朝廷的贡物，没有一处不妥当。
These twenty-two all completed their labours. Gaoyao was chief minister of crime, and the people were all subservient and obtained his genuine services. Boyi was director of ceremonies, and both upper and lower classes were retiring. Chui was head workman, and the various kinds of work were successfully accomplished. Yi was head forester, and hills and swamps were brought under cultivation. Qi was director of agriculture, and the various crops ripened in their seasons. Xie was minister of instruction, and the people were friendly together. Long superintended the foreign department, and men from afar arrived. The twelve governors did their duty, and the people of the nine provinces did not dare to rebel. But Yu's labours consisted in making great cuttings through the nine hills, making thoroughfares through the nine swamps, deepening the nine rivers, and regulating the nine provinces, each of which by their officials sent tribute, and did not lose their rightful dues.

方五千里，至于荒服。
方圆五千里，直至四方的边荒之地。
In a square of 5000 li he reached the wild domain.

南抚交险、北发，西戎、析枝、渠度、氐、羌,北山戎、发、息慎,东长、鸟夷，四海之内咸戴帝舜之功。
南至交险、北发，西至西戎、析枝、渠度、氐、羌，北至山戎、发、息慎，东至长夷、鸟夷，四海之内都称颂舜的功业。
To the south he governed Annam; on the north he reduced the western Rong tribes, Xizhi, Chusou, and the Qiang of Di; on the north the hill Rong tribes and the Xishen; and on the east the tall island barbarians. All within the four seas were grateful for Emperor Shun's labours;

于是禹乃兴《九招》之乐,致异物，凤皇来翔。
于是禹创作了《九招》之乐，这种音乐一演奏，各种祥瑞之物就闻声而至，连凤凰也会降临，随着乐声飞舞，
and Yu then performed the nine tunes, and the result was that strange creatures and phœnixes flew to and fro.

天下明德皆自虞帝始。
天下理想的政德就是从虞舜开始的。
Men of illustrious virtue in the empire began from the days of Emperor Shun of Yu.

舜年二十以孝闻，年三十尧举之，年五十摄行天子事，年五十八尧崩，年六十一代尧践帝位。
舜从二十岁时因孝顺而闻名天下，三十岁时被尧选拔任用，五十岁时代行天子之权，舜年五十八岁而尧崩，年六十一代尧而即天子位。
When Shun was twenty years of age he was noted for his filial piety, at thirty Yao raised him to office, at fifty he assisted in the administration of Imperial affairs, when he was fifty-eight Yao died, and when he was sixty-one he sat on the Imperial throne in Yao's stead.

践帝位三十九年，南巡狩，崩于苍梧之野。葬于江南九疑，是为零陵。
舜在帝位三十九年，到南方巡视，死在苍梧郡的郊野，葬在了长江以南的九疑山，也就是后来的零陵郡。
After he had occupied the Imperial throne thirty-nine years, he went on a hunting expedition to the south, died in the desert of Cangwu, and was buried at a place called Lingling (broken hillocks) in the Jiuyi range in Jiangnan province.

舜之践帝位，载天子旗，往朝父瞽叟，夔夔唯谨，如子道。封弟象为诸侯。
舜即天子之位后，乘着插有天子旗帜的车子，去拜见他的父亲瞽叟，态度恭敬虔诚，仍然和一个普通儿子对待父亲的礼节一样。舜封他的弟弟象为诸侯。
After Shun had come to the throne, and was flying the Imperial flag, he went to pay a visit to his father, Gusou, and addressed him in a grave and respectful manner, as a son should do. He raised his brother Xiang to the rank of prince.

舜子商均亦不肖，舜乃豫荐禹于天。十七年而崩。三年丧毕，禹亦乃让舜子，如舜让尧子。诸侯归之，然后禹践天子位。
舜的儿子商均也不成才，舜就预先把禹推荐给了上天。十七年后舜去世，三年丧事毕，禹也像舜把帝位让给尧的儿子一样让帝位于舜之子，可是诸侯们都归附禹，而后禹才即天子位。
Shun's son Shang-jun was also degenerate, so that Shun, being prepared, recommended Yu to the notice of Heaven, and seventeen years later he died. When the three years' mourning was over, Yu also yielded to Shun's son just as Shun had yielded to Yao's son, but the princes gave their allegiance to Yu, and he thereupon came to the Imperial throne.

尧子丹朱，舜子商均，皆有疆土，以奉先祀。服其服，礼乐如之。以客见天子，天子弗臣，示不敢专也。
尧的儿子丹朱和舜的儿子商均都享有封地，以祭祀他们的先祖；让他们依然采用他们父亲在位时的服饰，依然使用他们父亲在位时的礼乐；他们以宾客的身份来朝见天子，天子不把他们当作自己的臣民对待，以表示不敢把自己的权威加到他们的头上。
Yao's son Danzhu, and Shun's son Shangjun, both held territory so that they might be enabled to perform sacrifices to their ancestors; they paid the due observances, such as religious ceremonies and music, and they went to the audiences as the Emperor's guests. The Emperor did not dare, without due notification from his ministers, to act on his own responsibility.

自黄帝至舜、禹，皆同姓，而异其国号，以章明德。
从黄帝到舜、禹都是出自同一个姓氏，只是各自建立了一个国号，来表明他们各自的道德功业。
From Huangdi to Shun and Yu all the sovereigns had the same surname, but different dynastic appellations, and so displayed their illustrious virtue.

故黄帝为有熊，帝颛顼为高阳，帝喾为高辛，帝尧为陶唐，帝舜为有虞。帝禹为夏后而别氏，姓姒氏。
黄帝的国号叫有熊，颛顼的国号叫高阳，帝喾的国号叫高辛，帝尧的国号叫陶唐，帝舜的国号叫有虞，帝禹的国号叫夏后，后来帝禹改称姒氏。
So Huangdi was called Youxiong (possessor of bears); Emperor Zhuanxu was Gaoyang; Emperor Ku was Gaoxin; Emperor Yao, Taotang; Emperor Shun was Youyu (possessor of foresters); and Emperor Yu was Xiahou (prince of Xia); and he had also the name Si (sister-in-law);

契为商，姓子氏。弃为周，姓姬氏。
契的国号叫商，姓子氏。弃的国号叫周，姓姬氏。
Xie had the family name of Shang with the personal name Zi (son); and Qi had the family name Zhou with the personal name Ji (queen).

太史公曰：学者多称五帝，尚矣。
太史公说：有不少学者讲述过五帝之事，但五帝的时代久远。
The historian remarks on this as follows: Most scholars say that the five emperors are deserving of honour.

然《尚书》独载尧以来；而百家言黄帝，其文不雅驯，荐绅先生难言之。
《尚书》也只是记载了尧以后的事情；各家学派讲述黄帝的事情不少，但内容荒诞不经，有身份有头脑的人是不会相信那些话的。
but the Book of History only refers to Yao, and those who come after him, while the book of the 'hundred families' speaks of the Yellow emperor. The style of the latter work is not, however, very refined, and the officials and gentry hardly ever refer to it.

孔子所传《宰予问五帝德》及《帝系姓》，儒者或不传。
孔门教学用过的《宰予问五帝德》和《帝系姓》，不是儒家的经典，不被某些儒者所承认。
Confucius handed down these works, viz. 'Zai Yu's questions,' the 'virtues of the five emperors,' and 'the genealogies and names of the emperors,' but the literati doubt that they have been so handed down.

余尝西至空桐，北过涿鹿，东渐于海，南浮江淮矣，至长老皆各往往称黄帝、尧、舜之处，风教固殊焉，总之不离古文者近是。
我曾向西到过空桐山，向北到过涿鹿，向东到过大海边，向南曾渡过淮河长江，在我所到的相关地区，都曾听到过当地长老讲述黄帝或是讲述尧、舜的事情，而这些不同地区的风土人情也的确不同，因此总的感觉还是古文典籍的说法比较接近事实。
I have travelled westward as far as 'hollow cave' hill, northward beyond Zhuolu, eastward I have crossed the sea, while southward I have floated on rafts along the Yangtze and Huai rivers, and all the elders whom I met again and again talked of the places where the Yellow emperor, Yao, and Shun dwelt, and how very different their customs and teachings were. In short, those who are attached to the ancient literature must be familiar with their sayings.

予观《春秋》、《国语》，其发明《五帝德》、《帝系姓》章矣，顾弟弗深考，其所表见皆不虚。
我读过《春秋》、《国语》，其中对《五帝德》、《帝系姓》中一些说法的阐发是很清楚的，问题只是人们没作深入的研究，其实这两本书所表述的观点还是比较切实可信的。
I have looked at the 'Spring and Autumn' classic, and the 'Narratives of the States,' which make the 'virtues of the five emperors' and the 'genealogies and names of the emperors' very clear. I have inspected these works, but not thoroughly examined them, and the portions I have quoted are none of them unimportant.

书缺有间矣，其轶乃时时见于他说。
《尚书》有很多散佚，到现在已经相当久远了，其所散佚的内容偶尔还能从其他著作中见到。
There are defects in the book, and occasionally the views of others may be noted.

非好学深思，心知其意，固难为浅见寡闻道也。
如果不是好学深思，真正对古代传说有所理解，是很难对那些学识浅陋的人说清楚的。
Scholars should not think too deeply over the book, but take the general drift of it, when it can hardly be called superficial. There are a few investigations into doctrine,

余并论次，择其言尤雅者，故著为本纪书首。
于是我选择较为确实可信的材料，编排阐发，写成了这“本纪”部分的第一篇。
which I have discussed in the concrete, and then selected some of the more elegant sentences for quotation. Thus I have compiled the first chapter of the 'Original Records.'

