夏禹，名曰文命。
夏禹名叫文命。
Yu of Xia was styled Wenming.

禹之父曰鲧，鲧之父曰帝颛顼，颛顼之父曰昌意，昌意之父曰黄帝。
禹的父亲叫鲧，鲧的父亲就是帝颛顼，颛顼的父亲叫昌意，昌意的父亲叫黄帝。
Yu's father was Gun, whose father was the Emperor Zhuanxu, whose father was Changyi, whose father was Huangdi.

禹者，黄帝之玄孙而帝颛顼之孙也。
夏禹是黄帝的玄孙，帝颛顼的孙子。
so Yu was Huangdi's great-great-grandson, and Zhuanxu's grandson.

禹之曾大父昌意及父鲧皆不得在帝位，为人臣。
夏禹的曾祖父与父亲鲧都没有称帝，都是天子的臣下。
Yu's great-grandfather Changyi and his father Gun were both unable to sit on the Imperial throne, being simply officials.

当帝尧之时，鸿水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民其忧。
帝尧统治的时期，洪水滔天，浩浩荡荡，包围了山冈，漫上了丘陵，人民为此忧愁。
In the time of the Emperor Yao the deluge assailed the heavens, and in its vast expanse encompassed the mountains, and overtopped the hills, so that the common people were troubled about it.

尧求能治水者，群臣四岳皆曰鲧可。
尧寻找能够治水的大臣，群臣、四岳都说鲧可以胜任。
Yao sought for one capable of controlling the waters. All the officials and presidents of the four mountains said, 'Gun might do it.'

尧曰：“鲧为人负命毁族，不可。”
尧说：“鲧为人不好，违背命令，败坏同族，不可以。”
Yao said, 'Gun is a man who disobeys orders, and ruins his companions. He will not do.'

四岳曰：“等之未有贤于鲧者，愿帝试之。”
四岳说：“在与鲧同辈的人当中没有比他更贤能的了。希望天子不妨试一试他。”
The president of the four mountains said, 'Among his equals there is no one so worthy as Gun; I wish your Majesty would try him.'

于是尧听四岳，用鲧治水。
于是尧听从四岳的意见，起用鲧去治理洪水。
Upon which Yao, giving heed to the president of the four mountains, employed Gun to control the waters.

九年而水不息，功用不成。
鲧治理了九年，洪水不退，未获成功。
for nine years, but the waters did not abate, and the work was unaccomplished.

于是帝尧乃求人，更得舜。
这时帝尧便去寻求继承帝位的人，得到了舜。
Then the Emperor Yao sought a man in his stead, and secured Shun.

舜登用，摄行天子之政，巡狩。
舜被任用，代理执行天子的职守，巡视各地诸侯所守疆土。
Shun being employed in the public service was associated with the Son of Heaven in the administration. While on a tour of inspection.

行视鲧之治水无状，乃殛鲧于羽山以死。
在巡视过程中发现鲧治理洪水没有功绩，就在羽山将鲧处死。
he saw that there was no evidence that Gun kept the waters under control, so he imprisoned him for life on Mount Yu.

天下皆以舜之诛为是。
天下人都认为舜惩罚鲧是正确的。
and everyone in the Empire said that Shun's decision was a just one.

于是舜举鲧子禹，而使续鲧之业。
于是舜推举鲧的儿子禹，命他继续鲧的事业。
Shun then appointed Gun's son Yu to the post, and directed him to continue his father's occupation.

尧崩，帝舜问四岳曰：“有能成美尧之事者使居官?”皆曰：“伯禹为司空,可成美尧之功。”舜曰：“嗟，然!”命禹：“女平水土，维是勉之。”禹拜稽首,让于契、后稷、皋陶。舜曰：“女其往视尔事矣。”
尧去世后，帝舜问四岳道：“有谁能够发扬光大尧的事业?可让他官居首辅。”他们都说：“禹为司空，他可以发扬光大尧的事业。”舜说：“啊，对!”命令禹说：“你去平定水土，要努力完成这件事情。”禹跪拜叩头，推让给契、后稷、皋陶。舜说：“你还是去办理你所负责的事情吧。”
After Yao's death, the Emperor Shun asked the presidents of the four mountains, 'is there was any one who can perfect and develop Yao's undertakings, and can be employed in an official capacity?' They all said, 'There is lord Yu, the Minister of Works; he might perfect and develop Yao's labours.' Shun said, 'Ah yes! you, Yu, have regulated the water and the land, but in this office you must exert yourself.' Yu did obeisance with his head to the ground, and would have declined in favour of Xie, Prince Millet, or Gaoyao, but Shun said 'Go and attend to your duties.'

禹为人敏给克勤;其德不违,其仁可亲，其言可信；声为律，身为度，称以出;亶亶穆穆,为纲为纪。
禹为人敏捷勤劳；从不违背道德规范，仁爱可亲，言语诚实；禹的声音合乎音律，行动举止成为法度，以他为标准制定出权衡。他勤勉恭敬，成为天下人的楷模。
Yu was quick, earnest, and diligent, not deviating from virtue, kind, and lovable; his word could be depended on, his voice was musical, and his body, like a balance properly adjusted, moved unweariedly and solemnly in accordance with certain fixed rules.

禹乃遂与益、后稷奉帝命,命诸侯百姓兴人徒以傅土,行山表木,定高山大川。
禹于是就与益、后稷尊奉帝舜的命令，命令诸侯百官发动人员治理水土，顺着山势砍削树木作为标志，确定高山大川的治理规划。
Yu, then in company with Yi and Prince Millet, having received the Emperor's orders, bade the princes and people raise a gang of men to make a division of the land, and following the line of the hills hew down the trees, and determine the characteristics of the high hills and great rivers.

禹伤先人父鲧功之不成受诛，乃劳身焦思，居外十三年,过家门不敢入。
禹伤感于先父鲧没有完成治水的事业而受到惩罚，就劳碌奔波，操心焦虑，在外面过了十三年，经过家门都不敢进去。
Yu was grieved in that his progenitor Gun had been punished on account of his work being incomplete, so, wearied in body and distressed in mind, he lived away from his home for 13 years, passing the door of his house without daring to enter.

薄衣食，致孝于鬼神。卑宫室，致费于沟减。
禹自己穿衣吃饭一点也不讲究，而用丰洁的祭品孝敬鬼神；自己住的是简陋的房屋，却不惜花费大量资财以修筑沟油。
With ragged clothes and poor diet he paid his devotions to the spirits until his wretched hovel fell in ruins in the ditch.

陆行乘车，水行乘船，泥行乘橇，山行乘槿。
他走陆路的时候乘车，走水路的时候乘船，走泥路的时候用橇，走山路的时候用榉。
When travelling along the dry land he used a carriage, on the water he used a boat, in miry places a sledge, while in going over the hills he used spikes.

左准绳，右规矩,载四时,以开九州，通九道，陂九泽，度九山。
禹准绳规矩不离手，不违背四时节气，开划九州土地，疏通九条水道，修筑九处湖泽堤障，测量九大山系。
On the one hand he used the marking-line, and on the other the compass and square. Working as the seasons permitted, and with a view to open up the nine provinces, he made the roads communicable, banked up the marshes, surveyed the hills,

令益予众庶稻,可种卑湿。
命令益把稻种分给民众，他们可以种在低湿的田地上。
told Yi and his band that paddy should be planted in low damp places,

命后稷予众庶难得之食。食少，调有余相给；以均诸侯。
命令后稷将稀缺的食品分给民众。如果哪一个地方的食物不足，就从食物多的地方调剂过去，以均衡各地诸侯辖区的物品。
and directed Lord Millet and his band, when it was difficult to obtain food, or when food was scarce, to barter their surplus stock in exchange for what they had not, so as to put all the princes on an equal footing.

禹乃行相地宜所有以贡,及山川之便利。
禹巡视各地的特产以确定其贡赋，并考察运送贡品所经山川的交通便利情况。
Yu in this way worked for the mutual convenience of the respective districts as regards the distribution of the wealth and resources of the country.

# 语义对应句子组
禹行自冀州始。
禹治水的行程是从冀州开始的。
Yu started from Jizhou.

冀州：既载壶口,治梁及岐。既修太原,至于岳阳。覃怀致功,至于衡漳。
冀州：先治理好壶口，又去治理梁山与岐山。已治理好太原，又治理到岳阳。覃怀一带的水利工程已取得很大成绩，便接着去治理横流的漳水流域。
He commenced his work in Jizhou at Pot's mouth, and regulated the country about the Liang and Qi mountains. Having repaired the works at Taiyuan he went to the south of Mount Yue. He was successful with his labours at Tanhuai, and went to the cross-flowing stream of Zhang.

其土白壤。赋上上错,田中中。
冀州的土壤为砂质盐渍之土。缴纳上上等的田赋，也间杂着第二等，田地属于第五等。
The soil of the province was white clay. Its contribution of revenue was the first of the highest class with some admixture of the second, while its fields were the average of the middle class.

常、卫既从,大陆既为。
恒水、卫水都已疏通，河水可流入大海。治理大陆泽的工程已开始动工。
The Chang and Wei rivers flowed in their proper channels, and the Dalu plain was formed.

鸟夷皮服，夹右碣石入于河。
少数民族鸟夷进贡珍禽异兽的皮毛。鸟夷人进贡的路线是经由碣石山南侧进入黄河。
The bird barbarians, wearing skin dresses, kept close on the right to the granite rocks until they came to the river.

济、河维兖州:九河既道,雷夏既泽,雍、沮会同,桑土既蚕,于是民得下丘居土。
济水与黄河之间的地带是兖州：黄河下游的九条河已经疏通，雷夏洼地已经成为湖泽，雍、沮二水会合后一同注入雷夏泽，能种桑的土地已经在养蚕了，于是人民得以从山丘上搬下来，住在平地上。
The Qi and Yellow rivers formed the boundaries of Yanzhou. The nine branches of the Yellow river followed their courses, and Lei Xia was a marsh, in which the Yong and Ju streams were united. The mulberry region was supplied with silkworms, and then the people came down from the heights and occupied it.

其土黑坟,草繇木条。田中下,赋贞，作十有三年乃同。
兖州之土是一种含有黑色植物腐料的灰棕土壤。这里的草长得茂盛，树木修长。田地属于第六等，缴纳第九等田赋，兖州耕作了十三年，进贡才与其他八州相同。
The soil of the province was black loam, its herbage luxuriant, and trees tall. Its fields were the lowest of the middle class. Its contribution of revenue was fixed at what would just be deemed the correct amount, and after it had been worked for 13 years it was assimilated to the other provinces.

其贡漆丝，其雏织文。
它的贡赋是漆、丝，以及用圆形竹器盛装的有文采的丝织品。
Its tribute consisted of varnish and silk, and woven ornamental fabrics in baskets.

浮于济、漯，通于河。
兖州的贡物可由济水、漯水顺流入黄河。
You float along the Qi and Ta and so reach the Yellow river.

海岱维青州
渤海与泰山一带是青州
The sea and the Tai mountain formed the boundaries of Qingzhou.

埚夷既略，潍、淄其道
为青州境内的埚夷划定疆界，潍水、淄水的河道都已疏通
The territory of Yuyi was defined, and the Wei and Zi rivers flowed in their proper channels.

其土白坟，海滨广鴻，厥田斥卤
青州之土是肥沃的白壤，而海滨地带却是广阔的盐地，其田地为盐碱地
The soil of the province was white loam, and on the sea-coast were wide tracts of salt land. Its fields, which were impregnated with salt

田上下，赋中上
田地属于第三等，缴纳第四等的赋税
were the lowest of the first class, and its contribution of revenue the highest of the second.

厥贡盐缔，海物维错，岱畎丝、臬、铅、松、怪石
青州的贡物为盐和细葛布，以及种类杂多的海产品，泰山地区进贡丝、大麻、铅、松木、怪石
Its tribute consisted of salt, fine cloth of dolichos fibre, and productions of the sea of various kinds, with silk, hemp, lead, pine-trees, and strange stones from the valleys of the Tai.

莱夷为牧，其筐爸丝
莱夷地区进贡牧产品，以及用圆形竹筐盛的柞蚕丝
The wild tribes of Lai were shepherds, and brought in their baskets silk from the mountain mulberry.

浮于汶，通于济
运送贡物的船只先进入汶水，再通往济水
You float down the Wen, and so reach the Qi.

海岱及淮维徐州
东起大海、北至泰山、南到淮河的地带是徐州
The sea, the Tai mountain, and the river Huai formed the boundaries of Xuzhou.

淮、沂其治，蒙、羽其艺
淮水、沂水得到了治理，蒙山、羽山的土地上种植了庄稼
The Huai and Yi rivers were regulated. The Meng and Yu mountains were made fit for cultivation.

大野既都，东原底平
巨野泽已汇积成湖，东平一带的积水已经退去，地已平复
The waters of Daye formed a marsh, and the eastern plain became level.

其土赤填坟，草木渐包
徐州的土质属肥沃的红色黏土，草木生长茂盛
The soil of this province was red, clayey, and rich. The grass and trees grew more and more bushy.

其田上中，赋中中
这里的土地属于第二等，赋税为第五等
Its fields were the second of the highest class, and its contribution of revenue was the average of the second.

贡维土五色，羽畎夏狄，峄阳孤桐，泗滨浮磬
缴纳的贡物是五色土、羽山山谷的大雉鸟羽毛、峄山南侧的优质桐木、泗水河畔可做石磬的石头
Its tribute consisted of earth of different colours, the variegated pheasants from the valleys of mount Yu, the solitary dryandra from the south of mount Yi, and the floating musical stones from the banks of the Si.

淮沂嫔珠暨鱼，其筐玄纤缟
淮河下游的夷人要进贡珍珠和鱼类，以及用筐子盛装的黑色细绸和白绢
The wild tribes of the Huai brought oyster-pearls and fish, and their baskets were full of dark embroideries and pure white silken fabrics.

浮于淮、泗，通于河
装运贡品的船只从淮水、泗水进入与济水相通的菏泽
You float along the Huai and Si and so reach the Yellow river.

淮海维扬州:彭蠡既都,阳鸟所居。
北起淮河，东南到大海边，这一带是扬州：鄱阳湖已经蓄足水量，北方来的候鸟可以在这一带住下来。
The Huai river and the sea formed the boundaries of Yangzhou. The Pengli lake formed a reservoir of water, where the sun birds (i.e. the wild geese) settled.

三江既入,震泽致定。
三江已经流入大海，太湖的治理也已经完成。
The three large rivers entered the sea, and the shaking marsh became quite still.

竹箭既布。
大竹与小竹已经遍布各地。
Bamboos of different kinds were spread about.

其草惟夭，其木惟乔，其土涂泥。
这里的草木茂盛，树木高大。这里的土是潮湿的泥。
the grass grew luxuriantly, and the trees tall, but the soil was miry.

田下下，赋下上上杂。
田是第九等，赋税是第七等。
The fields of this province were the lowest of the lowest class; its contribution of revenue was the highest of the lowest class, with a proportion of the class above.

贡金三品,瑶、琨、竹箭、齿、革、羽、旄,岛夷卉服,其篮织贝,其包橘、柚锡贡。
进贡的物品是金、银、铜、美玉、大竹、小竹、象牙、犀牛皮、羽毛、旄牛尾。东南海中大小岛屿上的少数民族穿着用草编成的衣服，把贝锦放在筐内，把橘子和柚子包装好进贡。
Its tribute consisted of gold, silver, and copper, jasper, pearls, bamboos of various kinds, ivory, hides, feathers, and hair. The wild people of the isles brought garments of grass; their baskets were filled with woven silks and cowries, and their bundles contained small oranges and pummeloes, which were rendered when required.

均江海，通淮、泗。
运送贡品的船只由长江和黄海到达淮河和泗水。
You follow the course of the Great river and the sea, and so reach the Huai and Si rivers.

荆及衡阳维荆州:江、汉朝宗于海。
从荆山一线到衡山以南的区域是荆州：江、汉二水像诸侯朝见天子一样流向大海。
Mount Jing and the south of Mount Heng formed the boundaries of Jingzhou. The Great river and Han rivers paid their court to the sea.

九江甚中,沱、涔已道,云土、梦为治。
九江已经得到治理，沱、涔二水已被疏通，云梦泽一带也可以耕作了。
The nine rivers occupied all the middle of the land. The Tuo and Qian rivers flowed in their proper channels; and the land in the Yun and Meng marshes was made capable of cultivation.

其土途泥。
这里的土是潮湿的泥。
The soil of this province was miry;

田下中，赋上下。
田是第八等，赋是第三等。
its fields were the average of the lowest class; its contribution of revenue was the lowest of the highest class.

贡羽、旄、齿、革，金三品，钝、翰、栝、柏,砺、砥、磐、丹,维菌、露、枯,三国致贡其名,包瓯菁茅,其雏玄练玑组,九江入赐大龟。
贡物是羽毛、旄牛尾、象牙、犀牛皮，金、银、铜，椿树、柘木、桧木、柏树，粗磨刀石、细磨刀石、可做箭头的石头、朱砂，竹笋、美竹和横木。荆州境内诸国进贡他们的名产，将菁茅草包好放进匣子里，将黑色、浅红色的丝织品以及珍珠放在筐子里。九江一带进贡大龟。
Its tribute consisted of feathers, hair, ivory, hides, gold, silver, copper, woods of the wild varnish, cudrania, triloba, juniper, and cypress trees, with grindstones, whetstones, stone arrowheads, and cinnabar, likewise the Jun and Lu bamboos, and the wood of the redthorn, of which the three states brought the most noted specimens. The three ribbed rush was put in cases which were wrapped up, while the baskets were filled with dark and purple silks and strings of coarse pearls. From the country of the nine rivers the great tortoise was presented.

浮于江、沱、涔、汉，逾于雒，至于南河。
这些贡品先经过江水、沱水、涔水和汉水运送，再经由陆路进入雒水，到达南河。
You float down the Great river, the Tuo, the Qian, and the Han rivers, cross over to the Luo, whence you reach the southern part of the Yellow river.

荆、河惟豫州:伊、雒、瀍、涧既入于河,荥播既都,道荷泽,被明都。其土壤,下土坟垆。田中上，赋杂上中。贡漆、丝、缔、纻，其筐纤絮,锡贡磬错。浮于雒，达于河。
荆山和黄河之间的区域是豫州：伊水、雒水、瀍水、涧水都已经疏通流入黄河，荥播湖已经蓄足水量。疏导菏泽湖，将溢出之水向南泄入孟诸泽。豫州的土质疏松柔软，下层是肥沃硬质黑土。田是第四等，赋税是第二等，间杂第一等。贡品是漆、丝、精细葛布、纻麻，还有装在筐子里进贡的细棉，还进贡可制磬的石头。运送贡品的船只经由雒水进入黄河。
The Jing mountain and the Yellow river formed the boundaries of Yuzhou. The Yi, the Luo the Chan, and the Jian streams flowed into the Yellow river, the Yingbo waters formed a lake, and the waters of the Ke marsh were conducted to the Ming reservoir. The soil of this province was clayey, while in its lower parts it was rich, and in clods. Its fields were the highest of the middle class; its contribution of revenue was the average of the highest class, with a proportion of the very highest. The tribute was varnish, silk, fine cloth of dolichos fibre, and sackcloth. The baskets were filled with delicate embroidery and floss-silk, and stones for polishing musical stones were rendered when required. You float along the Luo until you reach the Yellow river.

华阳、黑水惟梁州:汶、蟠既艺,沱、涔既道,蔡、蒙旅平,和夷底绩。其土青骊。田下上，赋下中三错。贡璆、铁、银、镂、磐、磬,熊、罴、狐、狸、织皮。西倾因桓是来,浮于潜，逾于沔，入于渭，乱于河。
华山以南至黑水之间是梁州：汶山、蟠冢山已经可以种植，沱水、涔水已经疏通，蔡山、蒙山已经得到平治，对和水一带夷族的整治已见成绩。梁州的土为黑色。田是第七等，赋税是第八等，还可在上下三种浮动。这里的贡品是美玉、铁、银、镂钢、磐石、磬石，以及熊、罴、狐、狸、兽毛织成的地毯。西倾山一带的贡品沿桓水运来，船只经由潜水，然后上岸走陆路，再经由沔水，进入渭水，最后横渡黄河。
The south of Mount Hua and the Blackwater formed the boundaries of Liangzhou. The Min and Bo hills were cultivated. The Tuo and Qian rivers flowed in their channels, sacrifices were offered to the hills Cai and Meng on the plateaux, and the wild tribes on the He river were successfully managed. The soil of the province was bluish black. Its fields were the highest of the lowest class; its contribution of revenue was the average of the lowest class, with proportions of the rates above and below. Its tribute consisted of the best gold, iron, silver, steel, stone arrow-heads, musical stones, and nets woven from the hair of bears and foxes. From Xiqing you come along the river Huan, float down the Qian, cross over to the Mian, enter the Wei, and ferry across the Yellow river.

黑水西河惟雍州:弱水既西,泾属渭汭。
黑水到西河之间是雍州：弱水已经西流，泾水流入渭水的弯曲处。
The Blackwater and the western bend of the Yellow river formed the boundaries of Yongzhou. The Ruo water flowed westward; the Qing, the Qi, and Ju streams formed a junction with the Wei,

漆、沮既从,沣水所同。
漆水、沮水合为漆沮水，流入渭水，沣水同样流入渭水。
as also did the waters of the Feng.

荆、岐已旅,终南、敦物至于鸟鼠。
荆山、岐山已经得到治理，终南山、敦物山，直至鸟鼠山也已经平治。
The Jing and Qi hills were sacrificed too, and so were those of Zhongnan and Dunwu all the way to 'Bird-and-Rat' hill.

原隰底绩,至于都野。
原隰的治理获得成效，至于都野泽也已得到治理。
Successful measures were taken with the plains and swamps as far as the Duye marsh.

三危既度,三苗大序。
三危山已经可以居住，三苗获得了安定。
The people of Sanwei were controlled, and the Sanmiao tribes kept in good order.

其土黄壤。田上上，赋中下。
雍州的土是黄色的。田是第一等，赋税是第六等。
The soil of the province was yellow clay. Its fields were the highest of the highest class, while its contribution of revenue was the lowest of the second.

贡璆、琳、琅玕。
贡品是美玉、美石、如珠玉的宝石。
Its tribute was jade, topazes, and white cornelian stones.

浮于积石,至于龙门西河,会于渭汭。
进贡的船只从积石山附近的黄河，到达龙门、西河，在渭水与黄河的交汇处会合。
From 'Stonepile' hill you float on to 'Dragongate' on the western branch of the Yellow river at its junction with the Wei river.

织皮昆仑、析支、渠搜,西戎即序。
昆仑、析支、渠搜一带进贡地毯，西北少数民族也都归顺了。
The western Jung tribes from the Gunlun, Hsichih, and Ch‘üsou mountains with their hair-cloth and furs were kept in order.

道九山：汗及岐至于荆山,逾于河；
开通九条山脉的道路：汗山、岐山直到荆山，越过黄河；
Journeying over the nine mountains, you go from Qian and Qi hills to mount Jing; passing the Yellow river;

壶口、雷首至于太岳;
壶口山、雷首山直到太岳山；
Pot's mouth, and Leishou you come to Taiyue;

砥柱、析城至于王屋;
砥柱山、析城山直到王屋山；
from Dizhu and Xicheng hills to 'King's house';

太行、常山至于碣石,入于海；
太行山、常山直到碣石山，从此进入大海；
from Taihang and Mount Chang to the granite rocks and the sea;

西倾、朱圉、鸟鼠至于太华;
西倾山、朱圉山、鸟鼠山直到太华山；
from Xiqing, Zhuyu, and 'Bird-and-Rat' hills to mount Taihua;

熊耳、外方、桐柏至于负尾;
熊耳山、外方山、桐柏山直到负尾山；
from 'Bear's-ear,' Waifang, and Tongbo hills to Fuwei;

道蟠冢，至于荆山;
开通蟠冢山，直到荆山；
you journey from Bozhong to mount Jing;

内方至于大别;
内方山直到大别山；
from Neifang to Dabie,

汶山之阳至衡山，过九江，至于敷浅原。
从汶山的南面直到衡山，跨过九江，到达庐山南麓傅阳山的高平之地。
and from the south of Mount Min to Mount Heng, and cross the nine rivers to the Fuqian plain.

道九川
疏导了九条河流
Following the course of the nine large rivers

弱水至于合黎，余波入于流沙
弱水西流到合黎山，下游流入沙漠
from the Ruo river you go to Heli, whence the superfluous water flows into the Rolling sands

道黑水，至于三危，入于南海
疏导黑水至三危山，流入南海
you trace the Blackwater to Sanwei, where it enters the southern sea

道河积石，至于龙门，南至华阴，东至砥柱，又东至于盟津，东过雒汭，至于大邳，北过降水，至于大陆，北播为九河，同为逆河，入于海
疏导黄河流经积石山，直至龙门，南到华山之北，东至砥柱山，又向东到达盟津，在东边经过雒水的拐弯处，到达大邳山，再向北经过降水，到达大陆泽，向北分散为九条河流，各河道下游入海口河段都受海水倒灌成为逆河，最后注入大海
you trace the Yellow river from 'Stone-pile' to 'Dragongate,' southward to the north of Mount Hua, eastward to Dizhu, again eastward to the ford Meng, eastward you pass the junction of the Luo river to Dapei, northward past the Jiang water to Dalu, northward the stream is divided and becomes the nine rivers, reunited it forms the opposing river and flows into the sea

蟠冢道漾，东流为汉，又东为苍浪之水，过三滋，入于大别，南入于江，东汇泽为彭蠡，东为北江，入于海
开通蟠冢山以疏导漾水，东流而为汉水，又向东流为苍浪水，经过三滋水，流入大别山区，向南流入长江，向东汇积为彭蠡泽，再向东为北江，注入大海
From Bozhong you trace the course of the Yang. Flowing eastward it becomes the Han, further east it becomes the Canglang water, passing the three dykes it goes to Dabie, southward it enters the great river, eastward whirling on it forms the Pengli marsh, again eastward it forms the northern great river and enters the sea

汶山道江，东别为沱，又东至于醴，过九江，至于东陵，东迤北会于汇，东为中江，入于海
开通汶山以疏导长江，向东分出一条支流为沱江，又东流至醴水，流过九江，到达东陵后东流，又逶迤北流，与彭蠡湖交汇，向东流为中江，最后注入大海
From mount Min you trace the great river, which branching to the east becomes the Tuo, again eastward it comes to the Li, passes the nine great rivers and comes to the eastern ridge, flows eastward, winds to the north, and joins the eddies, eastward it becomes the middle great river and enters the sea

道沈水，东为济，入于河，溢为荥，东出陶丘北，又东至于荷，又东北会于汶，又东北入于海
疏导沈水，向东流为济水，注入黄河，漫溢而为荥泽湖，从陶丘北面东流，又向东到达菏水，再向东北与汶水汇合，又向东北流入大海
Tracing the course of the Yan river—it flows to the east, becomes the Qi, enters the Yellow river, flows on and becomes the Ying; eastward it comes out to the north of Taoqiu, further east flows into the Ke marsh, again north-eastward it unites with the Wen, and still further to the north-east it enters the sea

道淮自桐柏，东会于泗、沂，东入于海
开通桐柏山以疏导淮河，向东流与泗水、沂水会合，向东流入大海
Tracing the course of the Huai from Tongbo, to the eastward it unites with the Si and Yi rivers, and flowing to the east enters the sea

道渭自鸟鼠同穴，东会于沣，又东北至于泾，东过漆、沮，入于河
开通鸟鼠山以疏导渭水，向东与沣水会合，又向东北流至泾水，向东流经漆、沮，注入黄河
Tracing the course of the Wei from 'Bird-and-rat-in-the-same-hole' hill—it unites to the east with the Feng, further to the north-east it flows into the Jing, to the east passing the Qi and Ju streams it enters the Yellow river

道雒自熊耳，东北会于涧、瀍，又东会于伊，东北入于河
开通熊耳山以疏导雒水，向东北流与涧水、瀍水会合，又向东流与伊水会合，向东北注入黄河
Tracing the course of the Luo from 'Bear's-ear' hill, on the north-east it unites with the Jian and Chan, further to the east it unites with the Yi, and to the north-east enters the Yellow river

于是九州攸同,四奥既居,九山刊旅,九川涤原,九泽既陂,四海会同。
于是九州都已治理，境内四方都可安居，九州的山都经过砍削树木做出标志，九州的河流都已得到疏通，九州的沼泽之地都已修筑堤防，天下统一了。
So throughout the nine provinces a similar order was effected: the four coasts were built over, the hills were cleared of their wood and sacrificed to, the streams had their sources scoured out, the marshes were well banked, and all within the four seas had access to the capital.

六府甚修,众土交正,致慎财赋,咸则三壤成赋。
六府治理得很好，所有的领土都可征收赋税，谨慎地征收财赋，都是根据土地贫瘠的程度征收贡赋。
The six treasuries of nature were made the most of, and the various parts of the country exactly compared so that the receipt of revenue could be carefully adjusted according to their resources. The three characters of the soil were classified, and the taxation fixed.

中国赐土姓:“祗台德先，不距朕行。”
天子将九州的土地赐给诸侯，还赐给他们姓氏，命令道：“诸侯须把尊敬我的德行放在首位，不许违背我的行事。”
The central government conferred lands and surnames. Revenue was paid to the Emperor's exalted virtue, which was set up as an example, and none opposed his Majesty's action.

令天子之国以外五百里甸服:百里赋纳总,二百里纳锤,三百里纳秸服,四百里粟,五百里米。
规定在天子国都以外五百里的地域称为甸服：其中距离都城一百里以内的缴纳全禾，二百里以内的缴纳禾穗，三百里以内的缴纳脱去芒尖的禾穗，四百里以内的缴纳谷粒，五百里以内的缴纳米粒。
Now beyond the Emperor's capital 500 li constituted the Imperial domain. From the first hundred li they brought, as revenue, the whole plant of the grain, from the second the ears, from the third the straw, but the people had to perform feudal services, from the fourth the grain in the husk, and from the fifth the grain cleaned.

甸服外五百里侯服:百里采,二百里任国,三百里诸侯。
甸服以外五百里的地域称为侯服：其中百里以内为采地，二百里以内的为男爵地，三百里以内的封给诸侯。
Five hundred li beyond the Imperial domain constituted the domain of the nobles. The first hundred li formed the allotments to the feudal nobles, the second hundred those to the people employed by the State, and the other 300 those to the various princes.

侯服外五百里绥服：三百里揆文教,二百里奋武卫。
侯服以外五百里内的地域为绥服：其中三百里以内的地域设置主持文教事务的官员，靠外的二百里地域兴办国防，奋扬武威，保卫天子。
Five hundred li beyond the nobles' domain lay the peaceful domain. In the first 300 li they cultivated learning and the moral duties, and in the other 200 their energies lay in the direction of war and defence.

绥服外五百里要服:三百里夷,二百里蔡。
绥服以外五百里的地域称为要服：其中三百里以内的地域安置夷族，靠外的二百里安置罪犯。
Five hundred li beyond the peaceful domain was the domain of restraint. The first 300 were occupied by the Yi tribes, and the other 200 by criminals undergoing the lesser banishment.

要服外五百里荒服：三百里蛮，二百里流。
要服以外五百里的地域称为荒服：其中三百里以内的地域居住的是蛮族，靠外的二百里安置那些迁徙的部族。
Five hundred li beyond the domain of restraint lay the wild domain. Three hundred li were occupied by the Man tribes, and the other 200 li by criminals undergoing the greater banishment.

东渐于海,西被于流沙,朔、南暨:声教讫于四海。于是帝锡禹玄圭，以告成功于天下。天下于是太平治。
东方到大海边，西方到达沙漠，北方及南方都到达了最遥远的地方：天子的声威及教化遍及四海。于是舜帝赏赐给禹一块黑色的圭玉，向天下宣告治水取得成功。天下从此得到了很好的治理。
On the east reaching to the sea, on the west extending to the rolling sands, to the utmost limits of the north and south, Yu's fame and influence spread everywhere within the four seas, so the Emperor presented him with a dark-coloured sceptre, thus announcing to the empire the completion of his work. The empire was at peace and well governed.

皋陶作士以理民。
任命皋陶为审理刑狱的长官以治理人民。
Gaoyao was made chief minister of state with a view to his ruling the people.

帝舜朝，禹、伯夷、皋陶相与语帝前。
帝舜上朝，禹、伯夷、皋陶一起在舜的面前展开讨论。
The emperor Shun gave audience to Yu, Poyi, and Gaoyao, who addressed each other before the Emperor.

皋陶述其谋曰：“信其道德，谋明辅和。”
皋陶阐述他的谋略说：“诚实地施行德政，这样就能使决策英明，群臣之间同心协力。”
Gaoyao, setting forth his counsels, said, 'If a man sincerely follows the path of duty and virtue, his counsellors will be intelligent, and those who aid him will act in harmony.'

禹曰：“然，如何?”
禹说：“说的对，怎样去做呢?”
Yu said, 'Yes, but what do you mean?'

皋陶曰：“於!慎其身修，思长,敦序九族，众明高翼，近可远在已。”
皋陶说：“啊!谨慎地修身，长远地考虑。以宽厚的态度对待同族人，使众贤人做你的辅佐大臣，德政逐步由近及远。”
Gaoyao said, 'Oh! he will be careful about his personal cultivation, and will think constantly about it. Thus he will pay due regard to precedence among the nine branches of his kindred, all the intelligent will exert themselves in his service, and so from what is at hand he may attain to what is far off.'

禹拜美言，曰：“然。”
禹听了这番精辟的言论，拜谢说：“对呀。”
Yu made obeisance at these excellent words, and said, 'It is so.'

皋陶曰：“於!在知人，在安民。”
皋陶说：“啊!除此之外还要理解臣下，安定民心。”
Gaoyao said 'Oh! It all lies in knowing mankind, and in quieting the people.'

禹曰：“吁!皆若是，惟帝其难之。知人则智，能官人;能安民则惠，黎民怀之。能知能惠，何忧乎獾兜,何迁乎有苗,何畏乎巧言善色佞人?”
禹说：“啊!都像这样去做，恐怕连帝尧也会感到困难的。理解臣下就会明智，才能善用人材。能安定民心就会对人有恩惠，就会受到百姓的爱戴。能够做到明智和受人爱戴，怎么会担心驩兜，怎么会流放三苗，怎么会害怕花言巧语、谄佞不正的坏人呢?”
Yu said, 'Alas! to attain to all this would be difficult even for the Emperor. He who knows men is wise; he who can put men into the posts for which they are fit, and can quiet the people, is benevolent, and the black-haired race will cherish him in their hearts. When a man can be thus wise and kind, why should he have anxiety about a Huandou? why to be removing a chief of the Miao tribes? why should he fear a man of specious words, good appearance, and artful ways?'

皋陶曰：“然，於!亦行有九德,亦言其有德。”
皋陶说：“说得对，啊!行事需要有九种德行，要说某人有德行，就需要一件一件列出。”
Gaoyao said, 'Just so! there are in all nine virtues, and when we say that a man possesses these virtues it is as much as to say that he begins to do such and such things.'

乃言曰：“始事事,宽而栗，柔而立,愿而共,治而敬，扰而毅,直而温，简而廉,刚而实，强而义，章其有常，吉哉。
于是就列举道：“说人有德，要从他的行为来看。宽仁而又严肃，柔和而又坚定自立，厚道而又恭敬，具有才干而又严肃慎重，和顺而又刚毅，正直而又温和，直率而又有操守，刚正而又充实，坚强而又合乎道义，显现他的九种德行，那就非常完美了。
They are liberality combined with dignity, mildness combined with firmness, bluntness combined with respect, aptness for government combined with caution, docility combined with boldness, straightforwardness combined with gentleness, easy negligence combined with discrimination, resolution combined with sincerity, and courage combined with justice. If these are apparent, and that continuously, how fortunate it will be.

日宣三德,蚤夜翊明有家。
每天能表现九种德行的三种，早晚都恭敬地遵循道德规范，卿大夫就可以保有自己的封地。
He who daily displays three of these virtues could early and late support and educate a family.

日严振敬六德,亮采有国。
每天能庄重严肃地表现九种德行的六种，辅助天子处理政事，诸侯就可以保有他的国家。
He who is strict and reverent in cultivating six of these virtues could brilliantly conduct the affairs of the State.

翕受普施，九德咸事,俊乂在官，百吏肃谨。
如果能将三德和六德结合起来普遍施行，使具有九德的人都可以担任官职，贤俊之才都能任职，所有官吏都恭敬谨饬。
When such men are received and found everywhere, the possessors of those nine virtues will all be employed, and men of eminence will hold office, and the various officers will be respectful and diligent,

毋教邪淫奇谋。
不让邪淫和搞阴谋的人得逞。
not teaching heretical, vicious, or strange doctrines.

非其人居其官，是谓乱天事。
如果让不称职的人占据官位，这就叫扰乱天下大事。
If such men and such officers do not exist it may be said that the affairs of Heaven are in confusion.

天讨有罪，五刑五用哉。
上天要惩罚有罪的人，那就按五刑去分别实施惩罚。
Heaven punishes the guilty, and the five punishments can be severally applied for that purpose.

吾言底可行乎?”
我的话可以得到施行吗?”
Are my words sound, and can they be put in force?'

禹曰：“女言致可绩行。”
禹说：“你的话可以得到施行，并会获得功绩。”
Yu said, 'Your words are perfect, and can be successfully put in force.'

皋陶曰：“余未有知，思赞道哉。”
皋陶说：“我并没有智慧，只是思考着如何有助于治国之道啊。”
Gaoyao said, 'As to that I do not know, but I aim at assisting in the path of duty.'

帝舜谓禹曰：“女亦昌言。”
帝舜对禹说：“你也来发表高见吧。”
The Emperor Shun said to Yu, 'Will you, too, make a brilliant speech?'

禹拜曰：“於,予何言!予思日孳孳。”
禹拜谢说：“啊，我能说什么呢!我只想每天努力工作罢了。”
Yu did obeisance and said, 'Ah! what can I say? I aim at being assiduous from day to day.'

皋陶难禹曰：“何谓孳孳?”
皋陶诘问禹说：“怎样才算是努力工作呢?”
Gaoyao, teasing Yu, said, 'What do you mean by being assiduous?'

禹曰：“鸿水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民皆服于水。予陆行乘车，水行乘舟，泥行乘橇，山行乘横，行山刊木。与益予众庶稻、鲜食。以决九川致四海,浚畎浍致之川。与稷予众庶难得之食。食少，调有余补不足，徙居。众民乃定，万国为治。”
禹答道：“洪水漫天，浩浩荡荡地包围高山，漫过丘陵，黎民百姓被洪水淹没。我走旱路坐车，走水路坐船，走泥泞的路坐橇，走山路用槿，沿着山路砍削树木作为路标。同伯益一起给百姓稻谷和新杀的鸟兽。我疏通了九条河流，使它们流到大海，挖深疏通了田间的大水沟，使它们流进大河。与稷一起给老百姓难以得到的食物。食物少的地方，从有余粮的地方调拨一些粮食以补其不足，帮助人们搬迁到易于谋生的地方。百姓们都过上安定的生活，各个诸侯国也都得到了治理。”
Yu said, 'When the flood assailed the heavens, and in its vast expanse encompassed the mountains and overtopped the hills, so that the common people were overcome by the water, I travelled on dry land in a carriage, went about on the water in a boat, in miry places I used a sledge, while in going over the hills I used spikes. All along the hills I hewed paths through the woods, and together with Yi supplied the people with paddy and fresh meat. In order to drain the nine streams into the four seas, I deepened the channels and canals, and connected them with the rivers, and together with 'Millet' and the people in general when it was difficult to obtain food, and when food was scarce I bartered the surplus stock to make up for deficiencies, and removed the stores. Thus the people were quieted, and the various states properly governed.'

皋陶曰：“然，此而美也。”
皋陶说：“好啊，这番话说得真好啊。”
Gaoyao said, 'Yes! this was good on your part.'

禹曰：“於,帝!慎乃在位，安尔止。辅德，天下大应。清意以昭待上帝命，天其重命用休。”
禹说：“啊，帝舜!身居上位，你可要谨慎呀，忠于你的职责。用有德之人做你的辅佐，天下人就会响应。以虔敬认真的态度接受上帝的命令，上帝就会一再地嘉奖你。”
Yu said, 'Ah! your Majesty, carefully maintain the Throne which you occupy, and be quiet in your behaviour, assist virtue, and the nation will grandly respond to your pure desires. It will thus be manifest that you await the decrees of the Supreme Being, and will not Heaven renew its favouring appointment by conferring blessings on you?'

帝曰：“吁，臣哉，臣哉!臣作朕股肱耳目。予欲左右有民,女辅之。余欲观古人之象。日月星辰，作文绣服色，女明之。予欲闻六律五声八音,来始滑,以出入五言,女听。予即辟，女匡拂予。女无面谀，退而谤予。敬四辅臣。诸众谗嬖臣，君德诚施皆清矣。”
帝舜说：“唉，大臣们呀!大臣们呀!你们要做好我的手足耳目。我要引导帮助人民，你们要帮助我完成这一大业。我打算观察古人的图画，了解古人是怎样把日、月、星、辰的图形绣在丝织品上，以制成各种颜色的服装，你们要把这些考订明确。我要听六种音律、五种声音、八类乐器的演奏、七始咏的乐律，听取各方面的意见，你们要听清楚。如果我有过失，你们就要匡正辅助我。你们不要当面讨好我，背地里诽谤我。我恭敬地对待身边的近臣。那些以进谗言而邀宠的大臣，只要我真正履行了为君之道，他们就都会被清除。”
The Emperor said, 'Dear me! ministers! ministers! you constitute my legs and arms, my ears and eyes. If I wish to aid and support the people, you help me to do so. If I wish to see the emblematic figures of the ancients — the sun, moon, and stars — which are embroidered on the robes and coloured silks, you see them clearly for me. If I wish to hear the six pitchpipes, the five notes, and the eight musical instruments on the adjustment of which depend good government or misrule, and the consequent rise or decline of the five duties, you hear them for me. If I do wrong, you have to correct me. Do not flatter me to my face and speak evil of me behind my back. Be reverent, ye four ministers, and all ye calumniating minions of officials. If the prince's virtue is honestly displayed all men will be pure.'

禹曰：“然。帝即不时，布同善恶则毋功。”
禹说：“对。陛下您如果不是这样，而是不分善恶，同时进用好人与坏人，那就会劳而无功。”
Yu said, 'Yes! should your Majesty not act thus, but equally employ the good and bad, you will gain no credit.'

帝曰：“毋若丹朱傲，维慢游是好，毋水行舟，朋淫于家，用绝其世。予不能顺是。”
帝舜说：“不要像丹朱那样傲慢，只喜欢懒惰贪玩，无水也强要行船游乐，在家中与众人淫乐，因而使他自己的世系断绝了。我们不能像他这样。”
The Emperor said, 'Do not be arrogant like Zhu of Dan, who took his pleasure only in idleness and dissipation. He would make boats go where there was no water, introduced licentious friends into his family, and thereby cut off the hereditary honours of his house. I could not follow that line of conduct.'

禹曰：“予娶涂山，辛壬癸甲，生启予不子，以故能成水土功。辅成五服，至于五千里，州十二师，外薄四海，咸建五长，各道有功。苗顽不即功，帝其念哉。”
禹说：“我在辛日娶了涂山氏的女儿，到甲日就离开家去治水，以后生了儿子启，我却不曾养育他，所以我才能完成平治水土的功业。辅助陛下划分了五种服役的地域，一直到五千里的地方，每一个州动用了十二个师的人力，一直开辟到四方最为荒远的地方，每五个诸侯国都立一位贤者为长，他们都能引导民众建立事功。苗民负隅顽抗，不肯服役，因此不能给予官职，陛下对此要加以注意。”
Yu said, 'I was married at Tushan on the days xin and ren, and on the days gui and jia my son Qi was born. I did not treat him as a son, and therefore was able to complete my labours on the water and on land. I assisted, in completing the five Tenures, extending over 5000 li. In the provinces I appointed twelve tutors, and in the regions beyond to the four seas I established five presidents. These all did their duty, and achieved great results, but the Miao tribes were obstinate, and refused to do their work. Think of this, your Majesty.'

帝曰：“道吾德，乃女功序之也。”
帝舜说：“你将我的道德宣布于天下，这些成绩都是靠你的努力取得的。”
The Emperor said, 'That my virtue is the guide is the result of your orderly arrangements.'

皋陶于是敬禹之德，令民皆则禹。不如言，刑从之。舜德大明。
皋陶因此敬重禹的功德，命令民众都效法禹。不照命令行事，就用刑惩罚。舜的德业日益昌明了。
Gaoyao therefore, respecting Yu's virtues, bade the people carry out as a rule his plan of preferring admonition, but also made use of punishments. Shun's virtues were very clear.

于是夔行乐,祖考至,群后相让,鸟兽翔舞，《箫韶》九成，凤皇来仪,百兽率舞,百官信谐。
于是夔演奏乐曲，祖先的灵魂降临了，各诸侯国的国君相互礼让，鸟兽翩翩起舞，《箫韶》演奏九遍，凤凰前来飞翔聆听，百兽跟着跳舞，百官的确能够和谐相处。
Kui played some music; the spirits of Imperial ancestors, and hosts of nobles gave place to one another, and even birds and beasts wheeled about and danced. When the nine airs of Shun's music were played, the phoenixes came and put themselves in attitudes, the different beasts led each other on to dance, and the various officials were really in harmony.

帝用此作歌曰：“陟天之命，维时维几。”
帝舜因此作歌，唱道：“敬奉上天的命令，只在于顺应时势，只在于谨微慎行。”
The Emperor upon this composed the following ode, 'Being set on high by the favouring appointment of Heaven, we must be careful at every moment, and in every particular.'

乃歌曰：“股肱喜哉，元首起哉，百工熙哉!”
又唱道：“大臣们欣喜啊，君王奋起啊，百官的事业兴旺发达啊!”
He then sang as follows, 'When the members are happy, the head is exalted, and the various kinds of work are happily performed.'

皋陶拜手稽首扬言曰:“念哉,率为兴事，慎乃宪，敬哉!”
皋陶跪拜叩头继续说：“要牢记啊，君王处处作为臣民的表率，百事就振兴起来，谨慎地对待你立下的法度；对于法度可要恭敬啊!”
Gaoyao did obeisance with his head to his hands, and then to the ground, and with a loud voice said, 'Oh! think. It is yours to lead on and originate affairs. Pay careful attention to your laws. Be cautious.'

乃更为歌曰：“元首明哉，股肱良哉，庶事康哉!”
于是接着歌唱道：“君王圣明啊，大臣贤良啊，诸事安宁啊!”
He continued his song, saying, 'When the head is intelligent, the members are good, and all business will prosper.'

又歌曰：“元首丛胜哉,股肱惰哉，万事堕哉!”
又唱道：“君王只关注琐碎小事啊，大臣就会懒惰啊，各项事业就会荒废啊!”
Shun again sang as follows, 'When the head is vexatious, the members are idle, and all business is ruined.'

帝拜曰：“然，往钦哉!”
帝舜拜谢说：“对呀，大家认真地干吧!”
The Emperor bowed and said, 'Yes, go and be reverent!'

于是天下皆宗禹之明度数声乐,为山川神主。
于是天下的人都崇仰禹能够昌明法度历数声音乐律，尊奉他为山川百神之主。
The whole nation upon this applauded Yu's brilliant musical performance, and the divine lord of hills and streams.

帝舜荐禹于天，为嗣。
帝舜向上天推荐禹，让他当天子的继承人。
The Emperor Shun presented Yu to Heaven as his heir,

十七年而帝舜崩。
十七年后帝舜去世。
and 17 years afterwards the Emperor Shun died.

三年丧毕，禹辞辟舜之子商均于阳城。
三年的丧礼结束，禹为了辞让帝位给舜的儿子商均，躲避到阳城。
The three years' mourning being over, Yu retired before Shun's son Shangjun to the town of Yang,

天下诸侯皆去商均而朝禹。
天下诸侯都离开商均而去朝拜禹。
but the princes of the empire all left Shangjun, and went to Yu's court,

禹于是遂即天子位,南面朝天下，国号曰夏后，姓姒氏。
禹于是即天子之位，坐北向南接受天下的朝拜，国号为夏后，姓姒氏。
and Yu accordingly occupied the Imperial throne. Facing the south he gave audience to the nation. His dynastic appellation was (Xia hou) Prince of Xia, and his surname Si.

帝禹立而举皋陶荐之,且授政焉，而皋陶卒。封皋陶之后于英、六,或在许。而后举益，任之政。
帝禹继位后就推荐皋陶作为继承人，将要把处理国政的权力交给他，但是皋陶还没来得及即位就去世了。分封皋陶的后代在英、六等国，有的封在许国。然后举荐益，任用他管理政事。
The Emperor Yu sat on the throne and recommended Gaoyao for promotion, transferring also the administration of affairs to him, but Gaoyao died, and his descendants were enfeoffed with the principalities of Yingliu and Xu. The prince then recommended Yi for the appointment of administrator of affairs.

十年，帝禹东巡狩，至于会稽而崩。以天下授益。
帝禹即位后的第十年，到东部巡行视察，到达会稽却去世了。把天下传授给益。
Ten years elapsed, when the Emperor Yu, having gone to the east on a tour of inspection, died at Guiji, and the rule of the empire was given to Yi.

三年之丧毕，益让帝禹之子启，而辟居箕山之阳。
三年的丧礼结束后，益把帝位让给禹的儿子启，自己避居到箕山的南边。
When the three years' mourning was over, Yi resigned in favour of Yu's son Qi, and retired to the south of Mount Ji.

禹子启贤，天下属意焉。及禹崩，虽授益，益之佐禹日浅，天下未洽。
禹的儿子启很贤良，天下人希望他当天子。等到禹去世，虽然把帝位传给益，但是益辅佐禹的时间很短，天下人还未能信任他。
Yu's son Qi was worthy, and the nation fixed its desires upon him, but when Yu died, although the rule was given to Yi, he supported Yu but a few days, when the nation not being content

故诸侯皆去益而朝启，曰：“吾君帝禹之子也。”
所以诸侯都离开益而去朝拜启，说：“他是我们君王禹帝的儿子呀。”
the princes all left Yi, and went to Qi's court saying, 'He is the son of our sovereign' emperor Yu.

于是启遂即天子之位,是为夏后帝启。
启因此就继承了天子之位，这就是夏后帝启。
Qi then succeeded to the Imperial throne, and became Emperor Qi, the Prince of Xia.

夏后帝启，禹之子，其母涂山氏之女也。
夏后帝启是禹的儿子，他的母亲是涂山氏的女儿。
The Prince of Xia, Emperor Qi, was the son of Yu, his mother being the daughter of the lord of Tushan.

有扈氏不服,启伐之，大战于甘。
有扈氏抗命不服，启去讨伐它，大战于甘。
As the lord of Hu would not submit, Qi attacked him, and there was a great battle at Han.

将战，作《甘誓》,乃召六卿申之。
将要开战，启作了一篇誓词《甘誓》,召来六军的将领申明这一誓词。
Just before the engagement the speech at Gan was delivered to the six generals, who were summoned together;

启曰：“嗟!六事之人,予誓告女：有扈氏威侮五行,怠弃三正,天用剿绝其命。今予维共行天之罚。
启说：“喂!六军的全体将士，我以誓词告诚你们：有扈氏轻慢五行天象，懈怠毁弃三正大臣，上天因此要断绝它的国运。现在我奉行上天的这种惩罚。
Qi said, 'Ah! ye who are engaged in my six armies, I have a solemn announcement to make to you. The chief of Hu violently sets at naught the five human relations, and idly casts aside the three obligations of duty. Heaven will on this account oppose him and cut off the span of his life, and I am now but reverently executing the punishment appointed by Heaven.'

左不攻于左,右不攻于右，女不共命。御非其马之政，女不共命。
车左的兵士若不善于用箭射杀左边的敌人，车右的兵士若不善于用箭射杀右边的敌人，你们就是不奉行命令。驾车的士兵若不懂得驾驭战马的技术，你们就是不奉行命令。
If you on the left do not do your work on the left, and you on the right do not do your work on the right, it will be a disregard of my orders. If you, charioteers, do not observe the rules for the management of your horses, it will be a disregard of my orders.

用命，赏于祖;不用命，缪于社,予则帑缪女。”
奉行命令，就在祖庙赏赐你们；不奉行命令，就在社坛惩罚你们，我或者把你们降为奴隶，或者杀掉你们。”
You who obey my orders shall be rewarded in the ancestral temple, but you who disobey my orders shall be slain before the altar of the spirits of the land, and I will destroy both you and your children.”

遂灭有扈氏。天下咸朝。
就这样灭了有扈氏。天下都来朝贺。
He thereupon destroyed the chief of Hu, and the whole nation went to the court of the Prince of Xia.

夏后帝启崩,子帝太康立。
夏后帝启去世，他的儿子帝太康继位。
Emperor Qi died, and his son Emperor Taikang (Kang the first) came to the throne.

帝太康失国,昆弟五人，须于洛汭,作《五子之歌》。
帝太康因为耽于游乐而失去国位，他的五个弟弟，在洛水北岸等待他回国，作《五子之歌》。
The Emperor Taikang lost his kingdom; his five brothers waited for him on the north of the Luo river, and composed the song of the five sons.

太康崩,弟中康立，是为帝中康。
太康去世，他的弟弟中康继位，这就是帝中康。
Kang the first died, and his brother Kang the second came to the throne, that is the Emperor Kang the second.

帝中康时，羲、和湎淫,废时乱日。
帝中康的时候，掌管天文历法的官员羲、和沉湎于酒，扰乱了四时节令。
In the time of the Emperor Kang the second, Xi and He, indulging in wine and dissipation, neglected the seasons, and let the calendar get into confusion.

胤往征之,作《胤征》。
大臣胤前往征讨，作《胤征》。
Yin went to punish them, and the 'punitive expedition of Yin' was composed.

孔甲崩，子帝皋立。
孔甲去世，儿子帝皋继位。
Kongjia died, and his son Emperor Gao came to the throne.

帝皋崩，子帝发立。
帝皋去世，儿子帝发继位。
Emperor Gao died, and his son Emperor Fa came to the throne.

帝发崩，子帝履癸立，是为桀。
帝发去世，儿子帝履癸继位，这就是桀。
Emperor Fa died, and his son Emperor Lu Gui, that is Jie, came to the throne.

帝桀之时，自孔甲以来而诸侯多畔夏，桀不务德而武伤百姓，百姓弗堪。
帝桀的时候，从孔甲以来诸侯大多背叛了夏朝，夏桀不懂得致力德政以挽救颓势，却用武力伤害诸侯百官，百官都忍受不了他的暴政。
Regarding the reign of the Emperor Jie, ever since the time of Kongjia the barons had frequently rebelled. Jie of Xia did not strive after virtue, and the wars injured the people. Unable to endure their wrongs.

乃召汤而囚之夏台，已而释之。
夏桀就把汤召来，把他囚禁在夏台，不久释放了汤。
they summoned Tang to their aid, but he was imprisoned in the tower of Xia; being afterwards released.

汤修德，诸侯皆归汤，汤遂率兵以伐夏桀。
汤能修行德业，诸侯都归附汤，汤就率兵讨伐夏桀。
Tang cultivated virtue, and the princes all went over to him, so Tang led an army to attack Jie of Xia.

桀走鸣条，遂放而死。
桀逃亡到鸣条，终于在逃亡中死去。
Jie fled to Mingtiao, and was eventually driven out and slain.

桀谓人曰：“吾悔不遂杀汤于夏台，使至此。”
桀对人说：“我真后悔没有在夏台杀死汤，以至于今天落得这个下场。”
Jie observed to someone, 'I regret that I did not take the opportunity of killing Tang in the tower of Xia, and then I should not have been brought to such a pass.'

汤乃践天子位，代夏朝天下。
汤于是登上天子之位，取得了夏朝的天下。
Tang, being seated on the Imperial throne, superseded Xia, and gave audience to the people.

汤封夏之后，至周封于杞也。
汤分封土地给夏代后裔，到周朝时夏代后裔被封在杞国。
Tang enfeoffed the descendants of the Xias. Until the time of the Zhou dynasty they held the principality of Qi.

太史公曰：禹为姒姓，其后分封，用国为姓,故有夏后氏、有扈氏、有男氏、斟寻氏、彤城氏、褒氏、费氏、杞氏、缯氏、辛氏、冥氏、斟戈氏。
太史公说：禹姓姒，他的后代分封，就以所分封的国为姓，所以有夏后氏、有扈氏、有男氏、斟寻氏、彤城氏、褒氏、费氏、杞氏、缯氏、辛氏、冥氏、斟戈氏等不同的姓氏。
The historian remarks on this as follows: Yu bore the clan name Si. His descendants, enfeoffed as lords, took the names of their fiefdoms as their own clan names. Thus arose clans such as Xiahou, Youhu, Younan, Zhenxun, Tongcheng, Bao, Fei, Qi, Zeng, Xin, Ming, and Zhengge.

孔子正夏时,学者多传《夏小正》云。
孔子校正夏代的历法，所以学者中有很多人传授《夏小正》。
Confucius rectified the calendar of the Xia Dynasty, and scholars have long passed down the text known as Xia Xiao Zheng (The Lesser Almanac of Xia).

自虞、夏时，贡赋备矣。
从虞、夏时期开始，贡纳赋税的制度就已经很完备了。
As early as the eras of Yu (Shun) and the Xia, the system of tributes and taxes was already fully established.

或言禹会诸侯江南，计功而崩，因葬焉，命曰会稽。会稽者，会计也。
有人说禹在江南召集诸侯，考核诸侯功绩时去世，因此就安葬在那里，将该地命名为会稽。会稽，意即会计，就是会集诸侯核计其功绩的意思。
Some say that Yu gathered the feudal lords in the lands south of the Yangtze River. There, after reckoning their merits, he passed away and was buried on the spot. The place was named Kuaiji—which, indeed, signifies "reckoning merits."