大费生子二人：一曰大廉，实鸟俗氏；二曰若木，实费氏。
大费生了两个儿子：一个叫做大廉，就是鸟俗氏；另一个叫做若木，就是费氏。
Dafei had two sons. One was called Dalian and was the founder of the Bird-custom family. The other was called Ruomu and was the founder of the Fei family.

其玄孙曰费昌，子孙或在中国，或在夷狄。
若木的玄孙叫做费昌。他的子孙有的居住在中原地区，有的居住在夷狄地区。
His great-great-grandson was Fei Chang. Some of Fei Chang’s descendants lived in China and some lived among the Yi and Di tribes.

费昌当夏桀之时，去夏归商，为汤御，以败桀于鸣条。
费昌生活的时代正是夏桀时期，费昌离开了夏国，归顺商汤。在攻打夏桀的时候，费昌为商汤驾车，帮助商汤在鸣条打败夏桀。
In the time of Jie, the last ruler of the Xia dynasty, Fei Chang deserted the Xia dynasty and went over to the side of the Shang. King Tang, founder of the Shang, made him his carriage driver when he defeated Jie at Mingtiao.

大廉玄孙曰孟戏、中衍，中衍鸟身人言。
大廉的玄孙叫做孟戏、中衍，中衍长着鸟的身形而说人的语言。
Dalian’s great-great-grandsons were Mengxi and Zhongyan. Zhongyan had the body of a bird but spoke like a human being.

帝太戊闻而卜之使御，吉，遂致使御而妻之。
太戊帝听说后，想用中衍给自己当驭手，便就这件事占卜吉凶，卦象显示吉利。于是就将中衍招来，让他赶车，并且给他娶了妻子。
Emperor Taiwu, hearing of him, divined to see if he should employ him as his carriage driver. The response being favourable, he employed him as such, and also gave him a wife.

自太戊以下，中衍之后遂世有功，以佐殷国，故嬴姓多显，遂为诸侯。
从太戊开始，中衍的后世子孙，世代辅佐殷商有功，所以许多赢姓的人都显名于世，后来成为诸侯。
From the time of Emperor Taiwu on, the heirs of Zhongyan won merit generation after generation by assisting the state of Shang. Hence many members of the Ying family gained prominence and in time became feudal lords.

其玄孙曰中潘，在西戎，保西垂。
中衍的玄孙叫做中满，住在西戎，镇守西垂之地。
Zhongyan’s great-great-grandson was Zhongjue. He lived among the Western Rong people and guarded the western border.

生蜚廉。
他生了儿子蜚廉；
Zhongjue sired Feilian,

蜚廉生恶来。
蜚廉生恶来。
and Feilian sired Elai.

恶来有力，蜚廉善走，父子俱以材力事殷纣。
恶来很有力气，蜚廉跑得快。父子二人都凭借才能和勇力侍奉商纣王。
Elai was very strong and Feilian was skilled at running; both father and son offered their strength and ability in the service of Zhou, the last ruler of the Shang or Yin dynasty.

周武王之伐纣，并杀恶来。
周武王讨伐商纣王的时候，连同恶来一起杀死了。
When King Wu of the Zhou dynasty attacked and killed Zhou of the Yin, Elai was killed at the same time.

是时蜚廉为纣使北方,还，无所报，为坛霍太山而报,得石棺,铭曰：“帝令处父不与殷乱，赐尔石棺以华氏。”
那时候，正巧蜚廉为纣王出使北方。蜚廉回来后，见纣王已死，无人可以禀报，便在霍太山修筑祭坛向纣王禀报。在修这个祭坛的时候挖掘到一个石棺，上面有铭文，写的是“上帝不让蜚廉死于殷乱，现在赐给你一个石棺来光耀你的家族”。
Feilian at this time had been sent by Zhou on a mission to the northern region. When he returned, he had no one to report to, so he built an altar on Mt. Huotai and there made his report. He found a stone coffin with an inscription that read: “The emperor orders you, Chufu, not to take part in Yin’s disorders, but presents you with a stone coffin to bring glory to your family.”

死，遂葬于霍太山。
蜚廉死后就埋葬在霍太山。
When Feilian died, he was accordingly buried on Mt. Huotai.

蜚廉复有子曰季胜。
蜚廉还有一个儿子叫做季胜。
Feilian had another son named Jisheng,

季胜生孟增。
季胜生孟增。
and Jisheng had a son named Mengzeng.

孟增幸于周成王，是为宅皋狼。
孟增受到周成王的宠幸，因为孟增居住在宅皋狼，所以又将孟增称为宅皋狼。
Mengzeng enjoyed favour with King Cheng of the Zhou dynasty and is known as Zhai Black Wolf.

皋狼生衡父，衡父生造父。
宅皋狼生衡父，衡父生造父。
Zhai Black Wolf sired Hengfu and Hengfu sired Zaofu.

造父以善御幸于周缪王,周穆王得骥、温骊、骅骝、绿耳之驷,西巡狩,乐而忘归。
造父因为善于驾车而得到周穆王的宠幸。周穆王得到赤骥、温骊、骅骝、骤耳四匹好马，便驾着这四匹马到西方巡查，因为玩得高兴而忘了及时返回，
Zaofu won favour with King Mu of the Zhou dynasty because of his skill as a carriage driver. King Mu acquired a team of four, made up of a chestnut, a light grey, a dappled red, and a green ear, and embarked on a hunting tour to the west, enjoying himself so much he forgot to return.

徐偃王作乱，造父为缪王御，长驱归周，一日千里以救乱。
徐偃王乘机在东方作乱。穆王得到消息后，造父便为他赶着车子飞速回到镐京，随后又一日千里地奔驰到东方镇压叛乱。
When the rebellion of King Yan of Xu broke out, Zaofu was acting as carriage driver for King Mu and he raced over the long road back to the Zhou capital, covering 1,000 li in one day, in order to put down the rebellion.

缪王以赵城封造父,造父族由此为赵氏。
因为赶车有功，周穆王将赵城封给造父，造父一族从此便开始姓赵。
King Mu enfeoffed Zaofu in the city of Zhao, and Zaofu’s kin from this time on were known by the surname Zhao.

自蜚廉生季胜已下五世至造父，别居赵。赵衰其后也。
从蜚廉生季胜，再往下五代到造父，造父一族住在赵城，赵衰就是造父的后代。
It was five generations from Feilian and his son Jisheng down to Zaofu. Zaofu lived away from the court in Zhao; Zhao Cui was his descendant.

恶来革者，蜚廉子也，蚤死，有子曰女防。
恶来革也是蜚廉的儿子，死得较早。他有一个儿子叫做女防。
Feilian’s son Elai or Ge died at an early age. He had a son named Nüfang,

女防生旁皋，旁皋生太几，太几生大骆，大骆生非子。
女防生旁皋，旁皋生太几，太几生大骆，大骆生非子。
who sired Panggao. Panggao sired Taiji, Taiji sired Daluo, and Daluo sired Feizi.

以造父之宠，皆蒙赵城，姓赵氏。
因为造父受到周王的宠幸，于是非子等人也都冒充姓赵。
Because of the favour enjoyed by Zaofu, all these persons were permitted to be counted as members of the Zhao family of the city of Zhao.

非子居犬丘，好马及畜，善养息之。
非子居住在犬丘，喜好马匹和牲畜，善于蓄养繁殖。
Feizi lived at Quanqiu or Dog Hill. He loved horses and domestic animals and was skilled at raising and breeding them.

犬丘人言之周孝王，孝王召使主马于汗渭之间，马大蕃息。
犬丘的长官告诉了周孝王，周孝王便把非子找来，派他到汗水、渭水之间负责养马，马得到了大量的繁殖。
The people of Dog Hill mentioned him to King Xiao of the Zhou dynasty, and King Xiao summoned him and ordered him to pasture the royal horses in the area between the Qian and Wei rivers. The horses increased greatly in number.

孝王欲以为大骆適嗣。
周孝王想让非子做大骆的继承人。
King Xiao wanted to see Feizi designated as the heir of Daluo.

申侯之女为大骆妻，生子成为適。
当时申侯的女儿早已嫁给大骆为妻，已经生有一个儿子名叫成，是大骆的嫡子。
But Marquis Shen had given his daughter to Daluo as a wife and she had borne him a son named Cheng who had been designated as heir.

申侯乃言孝王曰：“昔我先郦山之女，为戎胥轩妻，生中酒，以亲故归周，保西垂，西垂以其故和睦。”
于是申侯就对周孝王说：“过去，我的祖先娶郦山氏，所生女儿嫁给中衍的玄孙胥轩为妻，生了中潘（注：原文“中酒”应为“中潏”），因为和周国相亲，所以归附于周，替周守卫西部边陲，西部边境因此能够与西戎和睦相处。”
Marquis Shen said to King Xiao, “Long ago an ancestor of mine, a woman of Mt. Li, married a man of the Rong people named Xuxuan and bore a son named Zhongjue. Because of his parentage Zhongjue paid allegiance to the Zhou dynasty and guarded the western border for it. As a result, there was peace and harmony on the western border.”

今我复与大骆妻，生適子成。申骆重婚，西戎皆服，所以为王，王其图之。
而今我再次将女儿嫁给大骆为妻，并为他生了嫡子成。我们与大骆两次婚姻，都使西戎归附，您因此才得以称王。请大王再好好考虑吧。
Now I have given my daughter to Daluo as a wife and she has borne him a son, Cheng, who has been designated heir. The Shen and Daluo families are thus doubly related, and all the Western Rong people have submitted to you. That is why you are able to reign as king. Your Majesty would do well to consider this.

于是孝王曰：“昔伯翳为舜主畜，畜多息，故有土，赐姓嬴。今其后世亦为朕息马，朕其分土为附庸。”
孝王说：“过去伯翳为舜帝主管牲畜，牲畜繁殖很快，所以舜帝封给他土地，赐姓赢。现在，他的后代也为我驯养马匹，我也分封土地给他，让他做我的附庸国。”
King Xiao replied, “Long ago Boyi supervised the raising of animals for Emperor Shun, and the animals multiplied greatly. Therefore he was assigned a domain and presented with the surname Ying. Now his descendant in later ages is raising horses for me. I therefore propose to set aside land for him so he may become a dependant domain,”

邑之秦，使复续嬴氏祀，号曰秦嬴。
于是便让非子在秦地建立城邑，让他接续赢姓的祭祀，号称秦赢。
assigning him the town of Qin and instructing him to carry on sacrifices to the Ying family.” He gave Feizi the title Qin Ying.

亦不废申侯之女子为骆適者，以和西戎。
但也并不废除申侯之女所生嫡子的地位，以此和睦西戎。
and refrained from removing Daluo’s son by the daughter of Marquis Shen from the position of heir in order to remain at peace with the Western Rong.

秦嬴生秦侯。
秦赢生秦侯。
Qin Ying sired Qin Hou.

秦侯立十年，卒。
秦侯在位十年去世。
who died after ten years of rule.

生公伯。
秦侯生公伯。
Qin Hou sired Gongbo.

公伯立三年，卒。
公伯在位三年去世。
who died after three years of rule.

生秦仲。
公伯生秦仲。
Gongbo sired Qin Zhong.

秦仲立三年，周厉王无道，诸侯或叛之。
秦仲即位后的第三年，因为周厉王荒淫无道，有的诸侯就反叛周王。
Three years after Qin Zhong assumed power, King Li of the Zhou dynasty acted in an unprincipled manner and many of the feudal lords turned against him.

西戎反王室，灭犬丘大骆之族。
西戎也反叛周王室，并灭掉了犬丘大骆的家族。
The Western Rong also revolted against the royal house and wiped out the descendants of Daluo in Dog Hill.

周宣王即位，乃以秦仲为大夫，诛西戎。
周宣王即位后，派秦仲为大夫讨伐西戎。
When King Xuan came to the throne of Zhou, he made Qin Zhong a grandee and sent him to punish the Western Rong.

西戎杀秦仲。
西戎杀了秦仲。
but they killed him.

秦仲立二十三年，死于戎。
秦仲在位二十三年，死在西戎。
Qin Zhong thus died among the Rong after holding his position for twenty-three years.

有子五人，其长者曰庄公。
秦仲有五个儿子，最大的是庄公。
Qin Zhong had five sons, the eldest of whom became Duke Zhuang.

周宣王乃召庄公昆弟五人，与兵七千人，使伐西戎，破之。
周宣王将庄公兄弟五人招来，给他们七千人马，派他们讨伐西戎，打败了西戎。
King Xuan summoned Duke Zhuang and his four brothers, gave them a force of 7,000 men, and sent them to attack the Western Rong, whom they defeated.

于是复予秦仲后，及其先大骆地犬丘并有之，为西垂大夫。
周宣王便将秦仲的封地，以及其先人大骆的犬丘之地都给了庄公，让他拥有两地，任西垂大夫。
The king then once more presented to Duke Zhuang the domain that had belonged to Qin Zhong, as well as the area of Dog Hill that had belonged to his ancestor Daluo, decreeing that he hold possession of both regions and act as grandee of the western border.

庄公居其故西犬丘，生子三人，其长男世父。
庄公居住在先人故地西犬丘，生有三个儿子，长子叫世父。
Duke Zhuang resided in the west, in the old region of Dog Hill. Duke Zhuang had three sons, of whom the eldest was named Shifu.

世父曰：“戎杀我大父仲，我非杀戎王则不敢入邑。”
世父说：“西戎杀死我的祖父秦仲，我不杀死戎王决不进入封邑。”
Shifu said, “The Rong killed our grandfather Qin Zhong. Until I have killed the ruler of the Rong, I will not venture to enter my domain.”

遂将击戎，让其弟襄公。襄公为太子。
于是率兵攻打西戎，而把自己的继承权让给了他的弟弟襄公，襄公成了太子。
He accordingly led his forces in a surprise attack on the Rong, turning over his domain to his younger brother, Duke Xiang. Duke Xiang thus became the heir apparent.

庄公立四十四年，卒，太子襄公代立。
庄公在位四十四年去世，太子襄公即位。
After Duke Zhuang had ruled for forty-four years he died and the heir apparent, Duke Xiang, succeeded him as ruler.

襄公元年，以女弟缪嬴为丰王妻。
襄公元年，将妹妹缪赢嫁给丰王为妻。
In the first year of his rule, Duke Xiang gave his younger sister, Muying, to be the wife of King Feng.

襄公二年，戎围犬丘，世父击之，为戎人所虏。
二年，西戎包围居住在犬丘的世父。世父率兵反击，结果被西戎俘虏。
In the second year of Duke Xiang’s reign the Rong besieged Shifu at Dog Hill. Shifu attacked them but was taken prisoner.

岁余，复归世父。
过了一年多又将世父放回。
A year or so later Shifu was returned to his domain.

七年春，周幽王用褒姒废太子，立褒姒子为適，数欺诸侯，诸侯叛之。
七年春天，周幽王因宠褒姒而废掉了太子宜臼，又立褒姒所生的儿子伯服为嫡子，并且多次戏弄诸侯，诸侯都叛离了他。
In the spring of Duke Xiang’s seventh year, King You of the Zhou dynasty, heeding the wishes of his favourite, Baosi, removed the heir apparent and set up Baosi’s son in his place, and several times deceived the feudal lords. The feudal lords revolted against him.

西戎犬戎与申侯伐周，杀幽王郦山下。
于是西戎部落的犬戎便和申侯共同勾结进攻周国，在郦山下杀死了周幽王。
and the Western Rong and Dog Rong peoples, joining forces with Marquis Shen, attacked the Zhou capital and killed King You at the foot of Mt. Li.

而秦襄公将兵救周，战甚力，有功。
这时秦襄公率领军队救援周室，奋勇作战，有大功。
Duke Xiang of Qin led his forces to the rescue of the Zhou, fighting bravely in battle and winning merit.

周避犬戎难，东徙雒邑，襄公以兵送周平王。
待至周平王为躲避犬戎，将周国的都城东迁雒邑时，秦襄公又派兵一路护送周平王。
In order to avoid harassment from the Dog Rong, the Zhou dynasty moved its capital east to the city of Luoyang. Duke Xiang led his troops to escort King Ping to the new capital.

平王封襄公为诸侯，赐之岐以西之地。
于是周平王便封秦襄公为诸侯，并将岐山以西的地盘都赏赐给他。
King Ping enfeoffed Duke Xiang as one of the feudal lords, bestowing on him the land from Mt. Qi on west.

曰：“戎无道，侵夺我岐、丰之地，秦能攻逐戎，即有其地。”
说：“西戎无道，侵占了我们岐山、丰水一带的土地。你们如能驱逐西戎，攻占其地，那片地盘就归你们所有。”
“The Rong have behaved in an unprincipled manner, invading and seizing our lands of Qi and Feng,” he said. “But Qin has succeeded in attacking and driving out the Rong, and therefore he shall possess these lands.”

与誓，封爵之。
于是他们订立盟约，给秦襄公确定了领地与爵位。
Thus the king swore an oath with Duke Xiang, bestowing a fief and title on him.

襄公于是始国，与诸侯通使聘享之礼，乃用骝驹、黄牛、羝羊各三，祠上帝西時。
从这时开始，秦遂成为诸侯国，开始与其他诸侯国互通使者，行聘享之礼。秦襄公用骝驹、黄牛、羝羊各三只，在西時祭祀上天。
Duke Xiang thus for the first time became the possessor of a feudal state and observed the rites appropriate to the exchange of embassies and official visits and banquets. He used a set of three sacrificial animals, a red colt with a black mane, a yellow ox, and a ram, to sacrifice to the Lord on High at the Altar of the West.

十二年，伐戎而至岐，卒。生文公。
十二年，攻伐西戎，到达岐山。秦襄公去世。襄公生文公。
In the twelfth year of his rule, he attacked the Rong and advanced as far as Mt. Qi, where he died. He was succeeded by his son, Duke Wen.

文公元年，居西垂宫。
文公元年，居住在西垂宫。
In the first year of his rule, Duke Wen resided in the Western Border Palace.

三年，文公以兵七百人东猎。
三年，文公率兵七百人向东狩猎。
In his third year he took a force of 700 armed men and went east to hunt.

四年，至汗、渭之会。
四年，到达汗水、渭水交界的地方。
In his fourth year he arrived at the confluence of the Qian and Wei rivers.

曰：“昔周邑我先秦嬴于此,后卒获为诸侯。”
文公说：“当初周孝王封我们的祖先秦赢于秦邑就是因为他在这里为周天子养马有功。后来又获得封赏成为诸侯。”
“In ancient times,” he said, “the Zhou dynasty gave my ancestor Qin Ying this land to dwell in, and his descendants have at last succeeded in becoming feudal lords.”

乃卜居之，占曰吉，即营邑之。
于是占卜在这里建都是否吉祥。占卜的结果显示吉祥，文公便马上令人在此处营建都邑。
He carried out divination by the tortoise shell to see if he should settle there. The answer being favourable, he proceeded to build a town in which he took up residence.

十年，初为鄜時,用三牢。
十年，首次建立鄜時,用牛、羊、猪各三只祭祀天地。
In his tenth year he established the Altar of Fu, using a set of three sacrificial animals in the rites there.

十三年，初有史以纪事，民多化者。
十三年，开始设置史官以记史事。民众中许多人受到教化。
In his thirteenth year the historians for the first time began to keep a record of events, and many of the inhabitants changed their ways.

十六年,文公以兵伐戎，戎败走。
十六年，文公率兵攻伐西戎，西戎败走。
In his sixteenth year Duke Wen led his forces in an attack on the Rong, who fled in defeat.

于是文公遂收周余民有之，地至岐，岐以东献之周。
于是文公就收聚周族的遗民为自己所有，将地盘扩展到了岐山。文公将岐山以东的地盘献给了周王室。
Duke Wen thereupon gained possession of the land as far as Mt. Qi, where the remnants of the Zhou people lived. He presented the area east of Mt. Qi to the Zhou dynasty.

十九年，得陈宝。
十九年，文公在陈仓获得宝石。
In his nineteenth year he gained possession of the Treasures of Chen.

二十年，法初有三族之罪。
二十年，开始制定诛灭三族的刑法。
In his twentieth year the law stipulating that a criminal’s three sets of relatives should be put to death along with the criminal himself was first promulgated.

二十七年，伐南山大梓，丰大特。
二十七年，砍伐南山的大梓树，砍断以后，从大梓树中出来一头大公牛，进入丰水中。
In his twenty-seventh year he attacked Daxin, Feng, and Date in the Southern Mountains.

四十八年，文公太子卒，赐谥为峥公。
四十八年，文公太子去世，赐太子谥号为峥公。
In his forty-eighth year Duke Wen’s heir apparent died and was given the posthumous title of Duke Jing.

峥公之长子为太子，是文公孙也。
峥公的长子被立为太子，太子是文公的孙子。
Duke Jing’s eldest son, the grandson of Duke Wen, was designated heir apparent.

五十年，文公卒，葬西山。
五十年，文公去世，埋葬在西山。
In his fiftieth year of rule Duke Wen died and was buried on the Western Mountain.

峥公子立，是为宁公。
峥公的儿子即位，就是宁公。
Duke Jing’s son was set up as ruler and is known as Duke Ning.

宁公二年，公徙居平阳。
宁公二年，将都邑迁到平阳。
In his second year of rule Duke Ning moved his residence to Pingyang.

遣兵伐荡社。
派遣军队攻伐西戎的城邑荡社。
He dispatched troops to attack Dangshe.

三年，与亳战,亳王奔戎，遂灭荡社。
三年，与西戎君主毫王作战，毫王战败后逃入戎地，遂灭掉了荡社。
In his third year he fought with Hao, the ruler of Dangshe, and Hao fled to the Rong people. Thus the settlement at Dangshe was wiped out.

四年，鲁公子翠弑其君隐公。
四年，鲁国的公子犟弑其君隐公。
In his fourth year Hui, a ducal son of the state of Lu, assassinated his lord, Duke Yin.

十二年，伐荡氏，取之。
十二年，秦国讨伐并占有了荡氏。
In his twelfth year Duke Ning attacked the Dang family and took them prisoner.

宁公生十岁立，立十二年卒，葬西山。
宁公十岁时被立为秦君，在位十二年去世，葬在西山。
Duke Ning became ruler in his tenth year and died in his twelfth year of rule, being buried on the Western Mountain.

生子三人，长男武公为太子。
宁公有三个儿子，长子武公被立为太子。
Duke Ning had three sons, of whom the eldest, who became Duke Wu, had been designated heir apparent.

武公弟德公，同母，鲁姬子。
武公与弟弟德公同母，都是鲁姬所生。
The second son, who had the same mother as the first, became Duke De.

生出子。
宁公的王姬生出子。
The third, Chuzi, was the son of a woman from the ruling family of the state of Lu.

宁公卒，大庶长弗忌、威垒三父废太子而立出子为君。
宁公去世后，大庶长弗忌、威垒、三父等人废掉太子，另立出子为君。
When Duke Ning died, the militia leaders Fuji, Weilei, and Sanfu deposed the heir apparent and set up Chuzi as ruler.

出子六年，三父等复共令人贼杀出子。
出子六年，三父等人又派人杀死了出子。
In the sixth year of Chuzi’s rule, Sanfu and the others joined in arranging to have someone attack and kill Chuzi.

出子生五岁立，立六年卒。
出子五岁的时候被立为君，当了六年国君被杀死。
Thus Chuzi became ruler at the age of five and died in the sixth year of his rule.

三父等乃复立故太子武公。
三父等人又重立故太子武公为国君。
Sanfu and the others then set up the former heir apparent as ruler, who became Duke Wu.

武公元年，伐彭戏氏，至于华山下,居平阳封宫。
武公元年，攻伐彭戏氏，一直打到华山之下，武公居住在平阳封宫。
In the first year of his rule Duke Wu attacked Pengxi, advancing as far as Mt. Hua. He took up residence in the Feng Palace in Pingyang.

三年，诛三父等而夷三族,以其杀出子也。
三年，武公杀死三父等人而且诛灭了他们的三族，因为他们杀死了出子。
In his third year he punished Sanfu and the others, wiping them out along with their three sets of relatives. This was because they had killed Chuzi.

郑高渠眯杀其君昭公。
这年郑国的高渠眯弑其君昭公。
Gao Qumi of the state of Zheng killed his lord, Duke Zhao (695 BC).

十年，伐邦、冀戎，初县之。
十年，攻打邦、冀戎，并在这些地方设县。
In his tenth year Duke Wu attacked the Rong people of Gui and Ji and for the first time established a district (xian) in the area.

十一年，初县杜、郑。灭小虢。
十一年，开始在杜、郑设县。这年灭掉了小虢。
In his eleventh year he set up the districts of Du and Zheng and wiped out the settlement of Xiaoguo.

十三年，齐人管至父、连称等杀其君襄公而立公孙无知。
十三年，齐国的管至父、连称等人弑其君襄公，而立公孙无知为君。
In Duke Wu’s thirteenth year Guan Zhifu, Lian Cheng and other men of Qi killed their lord, Duke Xiang, and set up the ducal grandson Wuzhi as ruler.

晋灭霍、魏、耿。
晋国灭掉了霍、魏、耿三个小国。
The state of Jin wiped out the states of Huo, Wei, and Geng.

齐雍廪杀无知、管至父等而立齐桓公。
齐国的雍廪杀死了公孙无知、管至父等人，而立桓公为君。
Yong Lin of Qi killed Wuzhi, Guan Zhifu, and the others and set up Duke Huan of Qi.

齐、晋为强国。
齐国、晋国成为当时的强国。
Jin and Qi thus became powerful states.

十九年，晋曲沃始为晋侯。
十九年，晋国的曲沃武公被立为晋君。
In Duke Wu’s nineteenth year the ruler of Quwo in Jin for the first time assumed the title of marquis of Jin.

齐桓公伯于鄄。
齐桓公在鄄邑会盟，开始成为霸主。
Duke Huan of Qi became an overlord (ba) at Juan.

二十年，武公卒，葬雍平阳。
二十年，秦武公去世，葬于雍县的平阳。
Duke Wu of Qin died in his twentieth year of rule and was buried at Pingyang in Yong.

初以人从死，从死者六十六人。
开始用活人殉葬。这次殉葬的有六十六人。
For the first time there were persons to accompany him in death, in this case sixty-six persons.

有子一人，名曰白，白不立，封平阳。
武公有个儿子名白。白没有被立为国君，而被封在平阳。
Duke Wu had only one son, named Bai. Bai was not set up as ruler but was enfeoffed in Pingyang.

立其弟德公。
武公的弟弟德公被立为君。
Instead, Duke Wu’s younger brother became ruler and is known as Duke De.

德公元年，初居雍城大郑宫。
德公元年，开始居住到雍县的大郑宫。
In the first year of his rule Duke De took up residence in the Dazheng Palace in the city of Yong.

以牺三百牢祠鄜時。
并用牛、羊、猪各三百头在鄜時祭祀天地。
He used 300 sets of sacrificial animals to sacrifice at the Altar of Fu.

卜居雍，“后子孙饮马于河”。
当初占卜迁居到雍是否吉利时，卦象显示说：秦国的后代子孙将把国境向东扩展到黄河边。
Divining by the tortoise shell to see if he should reside at Yong, he was told that his sons and grandsons in ages to come would water their horses at the Yellow River.

梁伯、芮伯来朝。
这年梁伯、芮伯来秦国朝见秦君。
The earls of Liang and Rui came to pay their respects at the Qin court.

二年，初伏，以狗御蛊。
二年，初次举行夏季入伏的祭祀仪式，在四门杀狗以驱除暑毒之气。
In the second year of Duke De’s rule the fu was observed for the first time, dogs being used to suppress evil influences.

德公生三十三岁而立，立二年卒。
德公三十三岁被立为君，在位二年就去世了。
Duke De became ruler at the age of thirty-three and died after two years of rule.

生子三人：长子宣公，中子成公，少子穆公。
他生了三个儿子：大儿子宣公，二儿子成公，小儿子缪公。
He had three sons; the eldest became Duke Xuan, the second became Duke Cheng, and the youngest became Duke Mu.

长子宣公立。
大儿子宣公继其父位。
After the death of Duke Wu, his eldest son became ruler and is known as Duke Xuan.

宣公元年，卫、燕伐周，出惠王，立王子颓。
宣公元年，卫国、燕国攻打周王室，周惠王出逃，王子颓做了周王朝的君主。
In the first year of Duke Xuan’s rule the states of Wey and Yan attacked the Zhou court, drove out King Hui, and set up Prince Tui as ruler.

三年，郑伯、虢叔杀子颓而入惠王。
三年，郑伯、虢叔杀掉王子颓，护送周惠王回到周国。
In Duke Xuan’s third year the earl of Zheng and Shu of Guo killed Prince Tui and put King Hui back on the throne.

四年，作密時。
四年，秦国建造密時。
In the fourth year of his rule Duke Xuan set up the Mi Altar.

与晋战河阳，胜之。
此年秦与晋国战于河阳，晋师败。
He fought with the state of Jin at Heyang and was victorious.

十二年，宣公卒。
十二年，秦宣公去世。
In his twelfth year Duke Xuan died.

生子九人，莫立，立其弟成公。
宣公生了九个儿子，都没有被立为国君，而是立了他的弟弟成公。
He had nine sons but none of them became ruler. Instead Duke Xuan’s younger brother was set up and is known as Duke Cheng.

成公元年,梁伯、芮伯来朝。
成公元年，梁伯、芮伯来秦国朝见。
In the first year of Duke Cheng’s rule the earls of Liang and Rui came to the Qin Court.

齐桓公伐山戎，次于孤竹。
这年，齐桓公讨伐山戎，军队驻扎在孤竹。
Duke Huan of Qi attacked the Mountain Rong and encamped at Guzhu.

成公立四年卒,子七人，莫立，立其弟缪公。
成公做了四年国君去世，他的七个儿子也都没有被立，而是由他的小弟缪公做了国君。
Duke Cheng died in the fourth year of his rule. He had seven sons but none of these became ruler, the rule passing to Duke Cheng’s younger brother, who became Duke Mu.

缪公任好元年，自将伐茅津，胜之。
缪公任好元年，他亲自率领军队攻伐茅津一带的戎人，取得了胜利。
In the first year of Duke Mu (659 BC), whose personal name was Renhao, the duke led an attack on Maojin and defeated it.

四年，迎妇于晋，晋太子申生姊也。
四年，缪公亲自到晋国迎娶夫人，夫人就是晋太子申生的姐姐。
In his fourth year he took a bride from the state of Jin; she was an elder sister of Shensheng, the heir apparent of Jin.

其岁，齐桓公伐楚，至邵陵。
这一年齐桓公讨伐楚国，军队到达邵陵。
This year Duke Huan of Qi attacked the state of Chu, advancing as far as Shaoling.

五年，晋献公灭虞、虢，虏虞君与其大夫百里侯,以璧马赂于虞故也。
五年，晋献公灭掉了虞国、虢国，俘虏了虞国国君和他的大夫百里侯，这是晋国用璧玉、骏马贿赂虞国得到的结果。
In Duke Mu’s fifth year, Duke Xian of Jin wiped out the states of Yu and Guo and took prisoner the ruler of Yu and the grandee Baili Xi. He did this by bribing the men of Yu with jade disks and horses.

既虏百里侯，以为秦缪公夫人媵于秦。
百里侯被晋国俘去后，晋国把他当做秦缪公夫人陪嫁的奴仆送给了秦国。
After taking Baili Xi prisoner, he sent him to Qin to act as an attendant to Duke Mu’s bride.

百里侯亡秦走宛，楚鄙人执之。
百里侯从秦国南逃跑到宛县，被楚国边境的人捉住。
Baili Xi escaped from Qin and fled to Wan, where he was seized by villagers of the state of Chu.

缪公闻百里侯贤，欲重赎之，恐楚人不与，乃使人谓楚曰：“吾媵臣百里侯在焉，请以五羖羊皮赎之。”
秦缪公听说百里侯能干，想用重金将他赎回，又恐怕楚国人不给，于是就对楚国人说：“我们秦国陪嫁的奴仆百里侯逃到了你们这里，我们想用五张黑羊皮将他赎回。”
Duke Mu had heard that Baili Xi was a man of worth and was anxious to buy him back from his captors, but he was afraid that the people of Chu would not hand him over. He therefore sent a messenger to say to Chu, “Baili Xi, one of the attendants to my bride, is there with you. I am prepared to offer five black ram skins as ransom for him.”

楚人遂许与之。
楚国人答应，就将百里侯交给了秦国。
The people of Chu agreed to this and handed him over.

当是时，百里侯年已七十余。
这时候，百里侯已经七十多岁了。
At this time Baili Xi was over seventy years old.

缪公释其囚，与语国事。谢曰:“臣亡国之臣，何足问!”
秦缪公将他释放，向他询问治理国家的事情，百里侯推辞说：“我是一个亡国之臣，哪里值得你来询问呢?”
Duke Mu untied his bonds and began questioning him on affairs of state. But Baili Xi declined to answer, saying, “I am an official from a state that has perished — how could I be worth consulting?”

缪公曰：“虞君不用子，故亡，非子罪也。”
缪公说：“因为虞国国君不重用你，所以它才亡国，这不是你的罪过。”
Duke Mu said, “The ruler of Yu failed to make use of you and so he perished. That is no fault of yours.”

固问,语三日，缪公大说，授之国政，号曰五羖大夫。
缪公坚持向他请教，于是两人一连谈论了三天。缪公非常高兴，称之为五羖大夫，任命他执掌秦国的政权。
He persisted in his questioning, and they talked for three days. Duke Mu was overjoyed and wanted to hand over the governing of the state to him, entitling him Lord Five Ram Skins.

百里侯让曰：“臣不及臣友蹇叔,蹇叔贤而世莫知。”
百里侯推辞说：“我不如我的朋友蹇叔。蹇叔比我能干，但没有人理解。”
But Baili Xi declined, saying, “I cannot compare to my friend Jian Shu. But no one in the world recognizes Jian Shu’s worth.”

臣常游困于齐而乞食饪人,蹇叔收臣。
以前我游历到齐国时，曾穷困得向锤邑人乞食，是蹇叔收留了我。
Once, when I was travelling and found myself in difficulty in the state of Qi, I had to beg food from the people of Zhi, and Jian Shu took me in.

臣因而欲事齐君无知，蹇叔止臣，臣得脱齐难，遂之周。
那时我想去投奔齐君无知，是蹇叔阻止了我，才使我避免了齐国的灾难；后来我到了周国，
I wanted to use the opportunity to enter the service of Wuzhi, who was the ruler of Qi at that time, but Jian Shu dissuaded me, and so I was able to escape the difficulties that attended Wuzhi’s downfall. “Later I went to the Zhou capital.”

周王子颓好牛，臣以养牛干之。及颓欲用臣，蹇叔止臣，臣去，得不诛。
周国的王子颓喜欢牛，我就以养牛术求见他，等到王子颓想重用我的时候，蹇叔阻止我，我听从蹇叔的意见离开了周国，这才免被杀戮；
Prince Tui of Zhou liked cattle, and so I tried to gain his attention by my skill in raising cattle. But when Prince Tui tried to employ me, Jian Shu stopped me from accepting. So I left, and was thus able to avoid being wiped out along with Prince Tui’s other supporters.

事虞君，蹇叔止臣。臣知虞君不用臣，臣诚私利禄爵，且留。
我去求见虞君，蹇叔还是阻止我，我也知道虞君不会重用我，由于我贪图利禄爵位，就暂且留了下来。
When I took service under the ruler of Yu, Jian Shu once more tried to stop me. I knew that the ruler of Yu would never heed me, but to tell the truth, I was hoping to profit from the salary and rank and so I stayed on.

再用其言，得脱，一不用，及虞君难：是以知其贤。
我两次听从蹇叔，两次幸免于难；只有一次未听，偏就碰上了虞国的灭亡。根据这些，所以我说蹇叔能干。
If I had once more listened to Jian Shu’s advice, I would have escaped, but because I failed to do so, I was involved in the ruler’s downfall. Because of this I have come to understand his worth.

于是缪公使人厚币迎蹇叔，以为上大夫。
于是，秦缪公派人用厚礼往请蹇叔，任用他为上大夫。
Duke Mu thereupon dispatched an envoy with generous gifts to invite Jian Shu to take office, making him a grandee of the upper rank.

秋，缪公自将伐晋，战于河曲。晋骊姬作乱，太子申生死新城，重耳、夷吾出奔。
这年秋天，秦缪公亲自率军讨伐晋国，在河曲与晋军交战。这时，晋国的骊姬作乱，太子申生死在新城，公子重耳、夷吾从晋国逃出。
In the autumn of this year Duke Mu led his troops in an attack on Jin, fighting with the Jin forces at Hequ. Lady Li fomented trouble in Jin, and as a result the heir apparent Shensheng killed himself at New City and Chonger and Yiwu fled.

九年，齐桓公会诸侯于葵丘。
九年，齐桓公在葵丘招集诸侯会盟。
In the ninth year of Duke Mu’s rule, Duke Huan of Qi called the other feudal lords together for a meeting at Sunflower Hill.

晋献公卒。立骊姬子奚齐，其臣里克杀奚齐。
晋献公去世。晋国的荀息立骊姬所生的奚齐为晋君，献公的臣子里克杀死了奚齐。
Duke Xian of Jin died, whereupon Lady Li set up her son Xiqi as ruler of Jin. Li Ke, a Jin official, killed Xiqi.

荀息立卓子，克又杀卓子及荀息。
荀息又立奚齐之弟卓子为君，里克又把卓子和荀息杀掉了。
and when Xun Xi set up another of the duke’s sons, Zhuozi, as ruler, Li Ke killed him too, along with Xun Xi.

夷吾使人请秦，求入晋。于是缪公许之，使百里侯将兵送夷吾。
晋公子夷吾向秦国请求，希望秦国帮他回国为君，秦缪公答应了，派百里侯率兵护送夷吾入晋。
Yiwu then sent an envoy to Qin asking if Qin would help him to become ruler of Jin. Duke Mu agreed to this and ordered Baili Xi to lead a force of troops and escort Yiwu to Jin.

夷吾谓曰：“诚得立，请割晋之河西八城与秦。”
夷吾对秦国说：“如果我做了晋国国君，我将把晋国黄河以西的八个城割让给秦国。”
Yiwu said, “If I succeed in becoming ruler, I would like to take eight of Jin’s cities lying west of the Yellow River and present them to Qin.”

及至，已立，而使丕郑谢秦,背约不与河西城，而杀里克。
等他回去做了国君后，就派丕郑到秦国宣告反悔，不再将河西八城割给秦国，同时还杀了里克。
Once he had reached Jin and become ruler, however, he sent Pi Zheng to Qin with excuses, reneging on his promise and failing to hand over the cities west of the Yellow River. Moreover, he put Li Ke to death.

丕郑闻之，恐，因与缪公谋曰：“晋人不欲夷吾，实欲重耳。今背秦约而杀里克，皆吕甥、卻芮之计也。愿君以利急召吕、卻,吕、卻至，则更入重耳便。”
丕郑听说后，很害怕，便向秦缪公献计说：“晋国人不希望夷吾做他们的国君，而是希望重耳做国君。如今夷吾违背了与秦国的约定，又杀掉了里克，这都是吕甥、卻芮的计谋。希望大王您用厚礼将吕甥、卻芮召到秦国来，等吕、邵二人一到秦国，那时再派人送重耳回晋就没有阻碍了。”
When Pi Zheng received word of this, he was frightened and began scheming with Duke Mu, saying, “The people of Jin do not want Yiwu as their ruler. The one they really want is Chonger. This going against the promise to Qin and putting Li Ke to death is all a plot by Lü Sheng and Xi Rui. I advise you to offer some inducement and send an urgent summons to Lü and Xi. Once they are here, it will be easy to have Chonger made ruler of Jin.”

缪公许之，使人与丕郑归，召吕、卻。
缪公接受了丕郑的建议，派人和丕郑一起回到晋国召唤吕甥、邵芮入秦。
Duke Mu agreed to this and sent someone to return with Pi Zheng to Jin and invite Lü Sheng and Xi Rui to come to Qin.

吕、邵等疑丕郑有间,乃言夷吾杀丕郑。
吕、邵等人怀疑丕郑有诈，便向夷吾建议杀死了丕郑。
These two men, suspecting that Pi Zheng was acting in collusion with Qin, advised Yiwu to have Pi Zheng put to death.

丕郑子丕豹奔秦，说缪公曰：“晋君无道，百姓不亲，可伐也。”
丕郑的儿子丕豹逃到了秦国，劝秦缪公说：“晋国国君无道，晋国的百姓都不亲附他，可以趁此机会攻打晋国。”
Pi Zheng’s son Pi Bao fled to Qin, where he advised Duke Mu, saying, “The ruler of Jin is unprincipled and his people do not support him. He is ripe for attack!”

缪公曰：“百姓苟不便，何故能诛其大臣?能诛其大臣，此其调也”。
秦缪公说：“如果晋国的百姓真的认为夷吾不适合做国君，那他怎么能杀掉晋国的大臣里克呢?他既然能够诛杀大臣，就说明他还是能够团结晋国的。”
But Duke Mu said, “If the people do not support him, then how is he able to put to death a chief minister such as Pi Zheng? The fact that he can do so shows that he and his people are in accord.”

不听，而阴用豹。
秦缪公虽然表面上不听丕豹的话，但暗中却重用丕豹。
So he refused to heed Pi Bao’s advice, though he secretly made use of him.

德公元年，初居雍城大郑宫。
德公元年，开始居住到雍县的大郑宫。
In the first year of his rule Duke De took up residence in the Dazheng Palace in the city of Yong.

以牺三百牢祠鄜時。
并用牛、羊、猪各三百头在鄜時祭祀天地。
He used 300 sets of sacrificial animals to sacrifice at the Altar of Fu.

卜居雍，“后子孙饮马于河”。
当初占卜迁居到雍是否吉利时，卦象显示说：秦国的后代子孙将把国境向东扩展到黄河边。
Divining by the tortoise shell to see if he should reside at Yong, he was told that his sons and grandsons in ages to come would water their horses at the Yellow River.

梁伯、芮伯来朝。
这年梁伯、芮伯来秦国朝见秦君。
The earls of Liang and Rui came to pay their respects at the Qin court.

二年，初伏，以狗御蛊。
二年，初次举行夏季入伏的祭祀仪式，在四门杀狗以驱除暑毒之气。
In the second year of Duke De’s rule the fu was observed for the first time, dogs being used to suppress evil influences.

德公生三十三岁而立，立二年卒。
德公三十三岁被立为君，在位二年就去世了。
Duke De became ruler at the age of thirty-three and died after two years of rule.

生子三人：长子宣公，中子成公，少子穆公。
他生了三个儿子：大儿子宣公，二儿子成公，小儿子缪公。
He had three sons; the eldest became Duke Xuan, the second became Duke Cheng, and the youngest became Duke Mu.

长子宣公立。
大儿子宣公继其父位。
After the death of Duke Wu, his eldest son became ruler and is known as Duke Xuan.

宣公元年，卫、燕伐周，出惠王，立王子颓。
宣公元年，卫国、燕国攻打周王室，周惠王出逃，王子颓做了周王朝的君主。
In the first year of Duke Xuan’s rule the states of Wey and Yan attacked the Zhou court, drove out King Hui, and set up Prince Tui as ruler.

三年，郑伯、虢叔杀子颓而入惠王。
三年，郑伯、虢叔杀掉王子颓，护送周惠王回到周国。
In Duke Xuan’s third year the earl of Zheng and Shu of Guo killed Prince Tui and put King Hui back on the throne.

四年，作密時。
四年，秦国建造密時。
In the fourth year of his rule Duke Xuan set up the Mi Altar.

与晋战河阳，胜之。
此年秦与晋国战于河阳，晋师败。
He fought with the state of Jin at Heyang and was victorious.

十二年，宣公卒。
十二年，秦宣公去世。
In his twelfth year Duke Xuan died.

生子九人，莫立，立其弟成公。
宣公生了九个儿子，都没有被立为国君，而是立了他的弟弟成公。
He had nine sons but none of them became ruler. Instead Duke Xuan’s younger brother was set up and is known as Duke Cheng.

成公元年,梁伯、芮伯来朝。
成公元年，梁伯、芮伯来秦国朝见。
In the first year of Duke Cheng’s rule the earls of Liang and Rui came to the Qin Court.

齐桓公伐山戎，次于孤竹。
这年，齐桓公讨伐山戎，军队驻扎在孤竹。
Duke Huan of Qi attacked the Mountain Rong and encamped at Guzhu.

成公立四年卒,子七人，莫立，立其弟缪公。
成公做了四年国君去世，他的七个儿子也都没有被立，而是由他的小弟缪公做了国君。
Duke Cheng died in the fourth year of his rule. He had seven sons but none of these became ruler, the rule passing to Duke Cheng’s younger brother, who became Duke Mu.

缪公任好元年，自将伐茅津，胜之。
缪公任好元年，他亲自率领军队攻伐茅津一带的戎人，取得了胜利。
In the first year of Duke Mu (659 BC), whose personal name was Renhao, the duke led an attack on Maojin and defeated it.

四年，迎妇于晋，晋太子申生姊也。
四年，缪公亲自到晋国迎娶夫人，夫人就是晋太子申生的姐姐。
In his fourth year he took a bride from the state of Jin; she was an elder sister of Shensheng, the heir apparent of Jin.

其岁，齐桓公伐楚，至邵陵。
这一年齐桓公讨伐楚国，军队到达邵陵。
This year Duke Huan of Qi attacked the state of Chu, advancing as far as Shaoling.

五年，晋献公灭虞、虢，虏虞君与其大夫百里侯,以璧马赂于虞故也。
五年，晋献公灭掉了虞国、虢国，俘虏了虞国国君和他的大夫百里侯，这是晋国用璧玉、骏马贿赂虞国得到的结果。
In Duke Mu’s fifth year, Duke Xian of Jin wiped out the states of Yu and Guo and took prisoner the ruler of Yu and the grandee Baili Xi. He did this by bribing the men of Yu with jade disks and horses.

既虏百里侯，以为秦缪公夫人媵于秦。
百里侯被晋国俘去后，晋国把他当做秦缪公夫人陪嫁的奴仆送给了秦国。
After taking Baili Xi prisoner, he sent him to Qin to act as an attendant to Duke Mu’s bride.

百里侯亡秦走宛，楚鄙人执之。
百里侯从秦国南逃跑到宛县，被楚国边境的人捉住。
Baili Xi escaped from Qin and fled to Wan, where he was seized by villagers of the state of Chu.

缪公闻百里侯贤，欲重赎之，恐楚人不与，乃使人谓楚曰：“吾媵臣百里侯在焉，请以五羖羊皮赎之。”
秦缪公听说百里侯能干，想用重金将他赎回，又恐怕楚国人不给，于是就对楚国人说：“我们秦国陪嫁的奴仆百里侯逃到了你们这里，我们想用五张黑羊皮将他赎回。”
Duke Mu had heard that Baili Xi was a man of worth and was anxious to buy him back from his captors, but he was afraid that the people of Chu would not hand him over. He therefore sent a messenger to say to Chu, “Baili Xi, one of the attendants to my bride, is there with you. I am prepared to offer five black ram skins as ransom for him.”

楚人遂许与之。
楚国人答应，就将百里侯交给了秦国。
The people of Chu agreed to this and handed him over.

当是时，百里侯年已七十余。
这时候，百里侯已经七十多岁了。
At this time Baili Xi was over seventy years old.

缪公释其囚，与语国事。谢曰:“臣亡国之臣，何足问!”
秦缪公将他释放，向他询问治理国家的事情，百里侯推辞说：“我是一个亡国之臣，哪里值得你来询问呢?”
Duke Mu untied his bonds and began questioning him on affairs of state. But Baili Xi declined to answer, saying, “I am an official from a state that has perished — how could I be worth consulting?”

缪公曰：“虞君不用子，故亡，非子罪也。”
缪公说：“因为虞国国君不重用你，所以它才亡国，这不是你的罪过。”
Duke Mu said, “The ruler of Yu failed to make use of you and so he perished. That is no fault of yours.”

固问,语三日，缪公大说，授之国政，号曰五羖大夫。
缪公坚持向他请教，于是两人一连谈论了三天。缪公非常高兴，称之为五羖大夫，任命他执掌秦国的政权。
He persisted in his questioning, and they talked for three days. Duke Mu was overjoyed and wanted to hand over the governing of the state to him, entitling him Lord Five Ram Skins.

百里侯让曰：“臣不及臣友蹇叔,蹇叔贤而世莫知。”
百里侯推辞说：“我不如我的朋友蹇叔。蹇叔比我能干，但没有人理解。”
But Baili Xi declined, saying, “I cannot compare to my friend Jian Shu. But no one in the world recognizes Jian Shu’s worth.”

臣常游困于齐而乞食饪人,蹇叔收臣。
以前我游历到齐国时，曾穷困得向锤邑人乞食，是蹇叔收留了我。
Once, when I was travelling and found myself in difficulty in the state of Qi, I had to beg food from the people of Zhi, and Jian Shu took me in.

臣因而欲事齐君无知，蹇叔止臣，臣得脱齐难，遂之周。
那时我想去投奔齐君无知，是蹇叔阻止了我，才使我避免了齐国的灾难；后来我到了周国，
I wanted to use the opportunity to enter the service of Wuzhi, who was the ruler of Qi at that time, but Jian Shu dissuaded me, and so I was able to escape the difficulties that attended Wuzhi’s downfall. “Later I went to the Zhou capital.”

周王子颓好牛，臣以养牛干之。及颓欲用臣，蹇叔止臣，臣去，得不诛。
周国的王子颓喜欢牛，我就以养牛术求见他，等到王子颓想重用我的时候，蹇叔阻止我，我听从蹇叔的意见离开了周国，这才免被杀戮；
Prince Tui of Zhou liked cattle, and so I tried to gain his attention by my skill in raising cattle. But when Prince Tui tried to employ me, Jian Shu stopped me from accepting. So I left, and was thus able to avoid being wiped out along with Prince Tui’s other supporters.

事虞君，蹇叔止臣。臣知虞君不用臣，臣诚私利禄爵，且留。
我去求见虞君，蹇叔还是阻止我，我也知道虞君不会重用我，由于我贪图利禄爵位，就暂且留了下来。
When I took service under the ruler of Yu, Jian Shu once more tried to stop me. I knew that the ruler of Yu would never heed me, but to tell the truth, I was hoping to profit from the salary and rank and so I stayed on.

再用其言，得脱，一不用，及虞君难：是以知其贤。
我两次听从蹇叔，两次幸免于难；只有一次未听，偏就碰上了虞国的灭亡。根据这些，所以我说蹇叔能干。
If I had once more listened to Jian Shu’s advice, I would have escaped, but because I failed to do so, I was involved in the ruler’s downfall. Because of this I have come to understand his worth.

于是缪公使人厚币迎蹇叔，以为上大夫。
于是，秦缪公派人用厚礼往请蹇叔，任用他为上大夫。
Duke Mu thereupon dispatched an envoy with generous gifts to invite Jian Shu to take office, making him a grandee of the upper rank.

十四年，秦饥，请粟于晋。
十四年，秦国发生饥荒，秦国向晋国请求粮食支援。
In Duke Mu’s fourteenth year there was a famine in Qin and the duke sent a request to Jin for grain.

晋君谋之群臣。虢射曰：“因其饥伐之，可有大功。”
晋惠公和大臣们商量，虢射说：“趁着秦国的饥荒讨伐他，一定可以取得成功。”
The ruler of Jin consulted his chief ministers. Guo Shi said. “Take advantage of the famine and attack Qin. You can win great merit!”

晋君从之。十五年，兴兵将攻秦。
晋惠公听从了虢射的建议。十五年，晋国派兵攻打秦国。
The Jin ruler decided to follow this advice. In Duke Mu’s fourteenth year the ruler of Jin called out his troops and led them in an attack on Qin.

缪公发兵，使丕豹将，自往击之。
秦缪公调集军队，使丕豹为将，缪公亲自统兵迎击晋军。
Duke Mu dispatched his own troops, appointing Pi Bao to lead them, and he himself took part in the attack.

九月壬戌，与晋惠公夷吾合战于韩地。
九月十三日，秦军与晋军会战于韩原。
On the day renxu of the ninth month, he joined in battle with Yiwu, Duke Hui of Jin, in the region of Han.

晋君弃其军，与秦争利，还而马鸷。
晋君夷吾脱离了晋国的军队，独自驱车来和秦军争胜负，在转弯的时候马被绊住了。
The Jin ruler, abandoning the main body of his troops, fought for the advantage with the Qin forces, but as he turned his carriage around, his horses became bogged down.

缪公与麾下驰追之，不能得晋君，反为晋军所围。
缪公见此情景率领部下直取晋君，结果中途被晋军包围。
Duke Mu and the men under him chased after in pursuit, but they were unable to capture the Jin ruler and instead found themselves surrounded by the Jin army.

晋击缪公，缪公伤。
晋军攻打缪公，缪公受了伤。
The Jin forces attacked Duke Mu and had wounded him.

于是岐下食善马者三百人驰冒晋军，晋军解围，遂脱缪公而反生得晋君。
正在这种危急时刻，忽然有三百多人冲开晋军的包围，不仅救秦缪公脱了险，反而乘机将晋惠公活捉了。
when 300 men who had earlier eaten horse flesh at Mt. Qi raced to his rescue, braving the Jin forces. The Jin forces broke their encirclement, so that Duke Mu was able to escape and return to his own forces, and in addition the Jin ruler was taken prisoner.

初，缪公亡善马，岐下野人共得而食之者三百余人，吏逐得，欲法之。
当初，秦缪公丢了一匹好马，是被岐山下的三百多个乡野之人偷去杀着吃了。官吏捕获他们之后，想按法律处死他们。
Sometime earlier, Duke Mu lost one of his prize horses. It was discovered that a group of 300 or more rustics in the region of Mt. Qi had captured the horse and eaten it. The Qin officials in time apprehended the men and were about to punish them.

缪公曰：“君子不以畜产害人。吾闻食善马肉不饮酒，伤人。”乃皆赐酒而赦之。
缪公说：“君子不因为牲畜的事而杀人。我听说，吃好马肉不喝酒，是会伤人的。”于是不仅释放了他们，而且赏给他们每个人一碗酒喝。
but Duke Mu said, “A gentleman does not allow his domestic animals to injure people. I have heard that if one eats good horseflesh but fails to drink wine, it will lead to illness.” He therefore had wine passed out to all the men and pardoned their offence.

三百人者闻秦击晋，皆求从，从而见缪公窘，亦皆推锋争死，以报食马之德。
这次，那三百个人听说秦国攻打晋国，都要求跟随缪公一起出征。战场上他们看到缪公被包围了，于是就奋力舍命杀来，以报答偷吃好马不被惩罚的恩德。
Later, when the 300 men heard that Qin was about to attack Jin, they all asked to join in the attack. They were thus among the troops accompanying the duke, and when they saw him hard pressed, they all brandished their spears and fought to the death in order to repay the kindness he had shown them with regard to the horseflesh.

于是缪公虏晋君以归。
秦缪公俘获晋君得胜而回。
Thus Duke Mu was able to take the ruler of Jin prisoner and return with him to Qin.

令于国：“齐宿，吾将以晋君祠上帝。”
他下令全国说：“我要斋戒，准备用晋君的人头祭祀上帝。”
He circulated an order throughout the state, saying, “Fast until tomorrow. I am going to offer the Jin ruler as a sacrifice to the Lord on High.”

周天子闻之，曰“晋我同姓”，为请晋君。
周天子听到这个消息说“晋君是我的同姓”，派人为晋君向缪公求情。
When the Zhou Son of Heaven heard of this, he exclaimed, “Jin belongs to the same clan as myself!” and begged Duke Mu to spare the Jin ruler.

夷吾姊亦为缪公夫人，夫人闻之，乃衰绖跣，曰：“妾兄弟不能相救，以辱君命。”
夷吾的姐姐，也就是秦缪公的夫人听说此事后，就穿上丧服，赤着脚，来对缪公说：“我连自己的兄弟都不能救，还得麻烦您来如此处置他。”
Duke Mu’s wife was an older sister of Yiwu, the Jin ruler, and when she heard of the proposed sacrifice, she donned mourning garments and appeared barefoot before the duke, saying, “I was unable to instruct my younger brother properly and so have occasioned you this inconvenience.”

缪公曰：“我得晋君以为功，今天子为请，夫人是忧。”乃与晋君盟，许归之。
缪公见此情形也只好改变主意说：“我俘虏了晋君，本以为是个大功劳，结果竟使得天子为他求情，夫人为他伤心。”于是就和晋君订立盟约，答应把他放回晋国。
Duke Mu said, “I supposed it was an illustrious feat to have captured the Jin ruler. But now the Son of Heaven speaks on his behalf, and my wife is grieved.” He therefore swore an oath of alliance with the Jin ruler and gave him permission to return to his own state.

更舍上舍，而馈之七牢。
并立即让他住进上等的客舍，用七太牢的礼节予以招待。
shifting him to better quarters and feasting him with seven sets of sacrificial animals.

十一月，归晋君夷吾，夷吾献其河西地，使太子圉为质于秦。
十一月，秦送晋君回国。晋君夷吾遂将上次答应的晋国的河西地区割给秦国，并派太子圉到秦国充当人质。
In the eleventh month the Jin ruler Yiwu returned to his state. He presented Qin with the territory west of the Yellow River and sent the heir apparent Yu to be a hostage in Qin.

秦妻子圉以宗女。
秦缪公将一名宗室的女子嫁给太子圉为妻。
Duke Mu gave the heir apparent Yu one of his daughters for a wife.

是时秦地东至河。
这时候秦国的边境已经向东扩展到了黄河边上。
At this time, therefore, the Qin territory extended all the way east to the Yellow River.

十八年，齐桓公卒。
十八年，齐桓公去世。
In Duke Mu’s eighteenth year, Duke Huan of Qi died.

二十年，秦灭梁、芮。
二十年，秦国灭掉了梁、芮二国。
In his twentieth year Qin wiped out the states of Liang and Rui.

二十二年,晋公子圉闻晋君病，曰：“梁，我母家也,而秦灭之。我兄弟多，即君百岁后，秦必留我,而晋轻亦更立他子。”
二十二年，晋太子圉听到晋君有病的消息，说：“梁国是我母亲的娘家，已被秦国灭掉了。我的弟兄很多，如果晋君去世，秦国一定会扣留我；而晋国也会毫不犹豫地改立其他的公子为君。”
In Duke Mu’s twenty-second year the heir apparent Yu, hearing that the Jin ruler was ill, said to himself, “Liang was my mother’s state, and now Qin has destroyed it. I have many brothers, and if my father, the ruler of Jin, should pass away, Qin is certain to detain me here. Then Jin will ignore my claim to the throne and set up one of my brothers instead!”

子圉乃亡归晋。
于是，子圉就逃回晋国去了。
He therefore escaped from Qin and made his way back to Jin.

二十三年,晋惠公卒，子圉立为君。
二十三年，晋惠公去世，子圉被立为君。
In Duke Mu’s twenty-third year Duke Hui of Jin died and his son Yu was set up as ruler.

秦怨圉亡去，乃迎晋公子重耳于楚，而妻以故子圉妻。
秦国怨恨子圉逃回晋国，就从楚国将公子重耳迎请到秦国，而将原来子圉的妻子嫁给重耳为妻。
Duke Mu of Qin, angry at Yu for having escaped, thereupon invited the ducal son Chonger to come to Qin from the state of Chu, and offered him as a wife his daughter who had previously been married to Yu.

重耳初谢，后乃受。
重耳开始时想拒绝，后来也就接受了。
Chonger at first declined the offer but later accepted her as his wife.

缪公益礼厚遇之。
于是缪公更加厚待重耳。
Duke Mu treated him with increasing respect and generosity.

二十四年春,秦使人告晋大臣，欲入重耳。
二十四年春，秦国派人到晋国告诉晋国的大臣，说秦国要送重耳回晋。
In Duke Mu’s twenty-fourth year he sent an envoy to inform the high ministers of Jin that he wished to place Chonger on the throne of Jin;

晋许之，于是使人送重耳。
晋国答应了，于是缪公派人护送重耳回到了晋国。
the ministers of Jin gave their consent. Duke Mu accordingly sent men to escort Chonger to Jin,

二月，重耳立为晋君，是为文公。
二月，重耳被立为晋君，这就是晋文公。
and in the second month he was set up as ruler of Jin. He is known as Duke Wen.

文公使人杀子圉，子圉是为怀公。
晋文公派人杀死了子圉，子圉就是晋怀公。
Duke Wen then dispatched men to kill Yu. Yu is known posthumously as Duke Huai of Jin.

其秋，周襄王弟带以翟伐王，王出居郑。
这年的秋天，周襄王的弟弟王子带勾结翟国的军队攻击周襄王，周襄王出逃到了郑国。
In the autumn of this year Dai, the younger brother of King Xiang of the Zhou dynasty, led the Di people in an attack on the king. The king fled from the capital and took up residence in the state of Zheng.

二十五年，周王使人告难于晋、秦，秦缪公将兵助晋文公入襄王，杀王弟带。
二十五年，周襄王派人向晋国、秦国通告王室内乱的情况。秦缪公率领军队帮助晋文公护送周襄王回国，并杀死了王子带。
In the twenty-fifth year of Duke Mu the Zhou king sent envoys to Jin and Qin to inform them of his difficulties. Duke Mu of Qin led his troops and assisted Duke Wen of Jin in restoring the Zhou king to his throne and killing his younger brother Dai.

二十八年，晋文公败楚于城濮。
二十八年，晋文公在城濮打败了楚国。
In Duke Mu’s twenty-eighth year Duke Wen of Jin defeated the state of Chu at Chengpu.

三十年，缪公助晋文公围郑。
三十年，秦缪公帮助晋文公包围了郑国。
In his thirtieth year Duke Mu aided Duke Wen of Jin in besieging the state of Zheng.

郑使人言缪公曰:“亡郑厚晋，于晋而得矣，而秦未有利。晋之强，秦之忧也。”
郑国派人对秦缪公说：“灭亡郑国只能使晋国强大，这对晋国来说是有所得，但对秦国来说却是一无所获。而且晋国的强大，就是对秦国的威胁。”
Zheng sent an envoy to say to Duke Mu, “Destroying Zheng and increasing the power of Jin will benefit Jin, but hardly be to the profit of Qin. The stronger Jin becomes the greater the worry for Qin!”

缪公乃罢兵归，晋亦罢。
于是缪公就先撤兵回国了，随后晋国也罢兵而回。
Duke Mu thereupon called off his troops and returned to Qin, and Jin likewise abandoned the siege.

三十二年冬，晋文公卒。
三十二年冬天，晋文公去世。
In Duke Mu’s thirty-second year Duke Wen of Jin died (628 BC).

郑人有卖郑于秦曰:“我主其城门，郑可袭也。”
郑国有人向秦国出卖郑国说：“我主管郑国都城的城门，你们可以趁机前来偷袭郑国。”
Some men of Zheng offered to betray Zheng to Jin, saying, “We have charge of the city gate — Zheng can be taken by surprise attack.”

缪公问蹇叔、百里侯，对曰：“径数国千里而袭人，希有得利者。且人卖郑，庸知我国人不有以我情告郑者乎?不可。”
缪公询问蹇叔、百里候，二人回答说：“途经好几个国家，行程数千里去偷袭别的国家，这是很难获得成功的。况且，郑国有人卖郑，怎么知道我们秦国就没有人将我们袭击郑国的消息告诉郑国呢?郑国是不可以偷袭的。”
Duke Mu consulted Jian Shu and Baili Xi, but they replied, “No one who has to pass through numerous states and journey 1,000 li to carry out a surprise attack is likely to have much success. Moreover, if these men betray Zheng’s secrets to us, how do we know that people of our own state are not secretly informing Zheng of our plans? The idea is impossible!”

缪公曰：“子不知也，吾已决矣。”
缪公说：“你们不知道其中的奥妙，我已经决定了。”
But Duke Mu replied, “You understand nothing of this. I have already made my decision!”

遂发兵，使百里侯子孟明视，蹇叔子西乞术及白乙丙将兵。
于是派兵出征，任命百里侯的儿子孟明视、蹇叔的儿子西乞术以及白乙丙为将。
Then he called out his forces, appointing Baili Xi’s son Mengming Shi, Jian Shu’s son Xiqi Shu, and Bai Yibing to lead the troops.

行日，百里侯、蹇叔二人哭之。
部队出发的那天，百里候、蹇叔二人对着即将出征的将士痛哭流涕。
The day the troops set out, Baili Xi and Jian Shu both wept over the departure.

缪公闻，怒曰：“孤发兵而子沮哭吾军,何也?”
缪公生气地说：“我军就要出发了，你们却在这里痛哭，瓦解我军心，到底为的是什么?”
Duke Mu accosted them angrily, saying, “Now that my troops are setting out, what do you mean by weeping and trying to detain the army?”

二老曰：“臣非敢沮君军。军行，臣子与往；臣老，迟还恐不相见,故哭耳。”
两位老人说：“我们不敢瓦解军心，但是部队就要出发了，我们的儿子也在这支部队中。我们已经老了，担心他们回来晚了就见不着我们了，所以在这里痛哭。”
The two old men replied, “It is not that we would dare to detain your army. But when the army goes, our sons go with it. We are old, and if the army is long in returning, we fear we will never see them again. That is the only reason we weep.”

二老退，谓其子曰：“汝军即败，必于崤厄矣。”
两个老人暗暗对他们的儿子说：“你们的军队假如打败仗，那一定是在崤山的险要地区。”
When the old men had withdrawn from the duke’s presence, they said to their sons, “If the army you are with is defeated, it will surely be at the narrow defile of Yao.”

三十三年春,秦兵遂东，更晋地，过周北门。
三十三年春，秦国的军队向东出发了，穿越晋国的领土，在经过周国北门的时候。
In the spring of Duke Mu’s thirty-third year Qin’s forces set out for the east. As they passed the northern gate of the Zhou capital on their way through Jin,

周王孙满曰:“秦师无礼，不败何待!”
王孙满说：“秦国军队的行动不合礼法，不打败仗才怪呢!”
the royal grandson Man said, “The Qin army has no sense of propriety. How could it help but suffer defeat?”

兵至滑,郑贩卖贾人弦高，持十二牛将卖之周。
秦国的军队到达滑邑的时候，遇到了一个郑国商贩叫做弦高，他正赶着十二头牛准备到周国去卖。
The Qin troops had advanced as far as Hua when they encountered Xian Gao, a travelling merchant of Zheng who was taking twelve oxen to the Zhou capital to sell.

见秦兵，恐死虏，因献其牛，曰：“闻大国将诛郑，郑君谨修守御备,使臣以牛十二劳军士。”
他看见秦国的军队，害怕自己被秦兵捉去杀掉，就趁势把他的牛献给秦军，说：“听说大国的军队将要讨伐郑国，我们郑国的国君已经认真地做好了防守的准备，特意派我用十二头牛前来慰劳秦国的将士。”
Seeing the Qin troops, he became fearful that he would be put to death or taken captive, and so he presented his oxen, saying, “The ruler of Zheng, hearing that your great state was coming to punish him, has respectfully taken measures for his defence, and at the same time has sent me with these twelve oxen for the provisioning of your officers.”

秦三将军相谓曰：“将袭郑，郑今已觉之，往无及已。”灭滑。滑，晋之边邑也。
秦国的三位将领听罢相互商量说：“本来是要偷袭郑国，现在郑国已经发觉了我们的行踪，我们即使赶去，恐怕也错过偷袭的机会了。”于是秦军便灭掉了滑邑。滑邑是晋国边境上的一个小城。
The three Qin generals conferred together, saying, “We had intended to make a surprise attack on Zheng, but now Zheng already knows about it. Better to abandon the mission than to go any farther.” They proceeded to wipe out Hua, a city on the Jin border.

当是时，晋文公丧尚未葬。
此时晋文公去世还没有安葬。
At this time the burial of Duke Wen of Jin had not yet been carried out.

太子襄公怒曰:“秦侮我孤，因丧破我滑。”
晋太子襄公愤怒地说：“秦国欺负我这个孤儿，竟然趁我们办理丧事的机会攻占了我们的滑邑。”
His heir, Duke Xiang, was enraged. “Qin thinks nothing of the fact that I am newly bereaved and takes advantage of our mourning to wipe out our city of Hua!” he said.

遂墨衰绖,发兵遮秦兵于崤，击之，大破秦军，无一人得脱者,虏秦三将以归。
于是就将孝服染成黑色，出兵在崤山截住回撤的秦军，遂将秦军彻底消灭，没有一兵一卒能够逃脱，秦国的三个将领也全被俘虏了。
Then he dyed his white mourning garments black and called out his troops to cut off the Qin forces at Yao. He inflicted a crushing defeat on the Qin army, not allowing a single man to escape. He took the three Qin commanders prisoner and returned with them to Jin.

文公夫人，秦女也,为秦三囚将请曰：“缪公之怨此三人入于骨髓，愿令此三人归，令我君得自快烹之。”
晋文公的夫人是秦缪公的女儿，她为三个被俘虏的秦国将领向晋襄公求情说：“秦缪公对这三个人简直是恨入骨髓，希望你放他们回秦国去，好让秦君亲自杀掉他们解恨。”
The widow of Duke Wen of Jin was a daughter of the Qin ruling house, and she spoke to her son regarding the three captive Qin generals, saying, “The hatred Duke Mu bears these men eats into his very bones and marrow! I beg you to send them back to Qin so that my lord of Qin may have the pleasure of boiling them alive!”

晋君许之，归秦三将。
晋襄公答应了夫人的请求，释放三人回国。
The Jin ruler consented to this and sent the three generals back to Qin.

三将至，缪公素服郊迎,向三人哭曰：“孤以不用百里侯、蹇叔言以辱三子，三子何罪乎?子其悉心雪耻图，毋怠。”
三个将军回到秦国时，秦缪公身穿素服亲自到郊外迎接，他对这三位将军哭着说：“我因为没有听百里侯、蹇叔的话，所以使你们三位将军受了侮辱。你们有什么罪过呢?你们就全力准备洗雪耻辱吧，不要懈怠。”
When they arrived, Duke Mu donned white mourning garments and went out to the suburbs to greet them. Addressing them, he wept and said, “I failed to heed the advice of Baili Xi and Jian Shu and so brought shame on you three. What fault have you committed? I ask only that you give all your thought to how we may wipe out this disgrace, never slacking your efforts!”

遂复三人官秩如故，愈益厚之。
于是恢复了他们以前的职务与爵禄，比过去更加厚待他们。
He then restored the three men to their posts and ranks and treated them with even greater favour.

三十四年，楚太子商臣弑其父成王代立。
三十四年，楚国太子商臣杀了他的父亲楚成王，自立为楚王。
In Duke Mu’s thirty-fourth year Shangchen, the heir apparent of the state of Chu, murdered his father, King Cheng, and became ruler in his place.

缪公于是复使孟明视等将兵伐晋，战于彭衙。秦不利，引兵归。
秦缪公派孟明视等率兵攻打晋国，在彭衙与晋军交战，秦军未能取胜，撤兵而回。
Duke Mu once more ordered Mengming Shi and the other commanders to lead the Qin forces in an attack on Jin. They engaged in battle at Pengya but, failing to win the advantage, withdrew their troops and returned home.

戎王使由余于秦。由余，其先晋人也，亡入戎，能晋言。闻缪公贤，故使由余观秦。
这年，戎王派由余出使秦国。由余的祖先原是晋国人，逃到了戎。由余能说晋国话。戎王听说秦缪公贤明，所以派由余到秦国考察。
The ruler of the Rong people sent You Yu to Qin. You Yu’s forbears were people of Jin who had fled from Jin and gone to live among the Rong. You Yu could therefore speak the language of Jin. The Rong ruler, having heard that Duke Mu was a worthy man, dispatched You Yu to observe the situation in Qin.

秦缪公示以宫室、积聚。由余曰：“使鬼为之，则劳神矣；使人为之，亦苦民矣。”
秦缪公让由余观看了秦国的宫室和储备，由余说：“这些宫室要是让鬼神去建造，那些鬼神也会感到很劳累；要是让人去建造，那人民也太辛苦了。”
Duke Mu showed You Yu the goods and possessions heaped up in his palace, but You Yu said, “If these were made by ghosts, it must have exhausted the spirit world, and if they were made by human beings, it must have been bitter for the people!”

缪公怪之，问曰：“中国以诗书记乐、法度为政，然尚时乱；今戎夷无此，何以为治，不亦难乎！”
缪公感到很奇怪，问他说：“中原各国都是用诗书礼乐、法度来治理国家，即使这样，还时常发生变乱；戎夷没有诗书礼乐，你们用什么来治理国家呢？恐怕也太困难了吧。”
Duke Mu, puzzled, questioned him, saying, “China employs the Odes and Documents, its rites and music, its laws and regulations to govern the land, but even so there are times of chaos. Now the Rong and Yi people have none of these, so how can they bring about order? It must be very difficult, is it not?”

由余笑曰：“此乃中国所以乱也。夫自上圣黄帝作为礼乐法度，身以先之，仅以小治。及其后世，日以骄淫。阻法度之威，以责督于下，下罢极则以仁义怨望于上，上下交争怨而相篡弑，至于灭宗，皆以此类也。”
由余说：“这就是中原地区所以容易发生变乱的原因！从上古的圣人黄帝就开始制定礼乐法度，而且黄帝自己率先实行它，即使这样也不过是达到小治而已。到了后世，在上位的人一天天的骄奢淫逸，自己不遵守法度，却专门用这些法度来督责百姓。下边的人疲困到了极点，就怨恨居上位的人不行仁义。上下互相怨恨，于是就有篡位弑君以及诛灭宗族，许多事情就是这样造成的呀。”
You Yu laughed and replied, “It is precisely because of these that China is in chaos! In ancient times when the sage rulers such as the Yellow Emperor created rites and music, laws and regulations, they took the lead in observing and carrying them out, and a small measure of order was achieved. But the rulers of later ages grow daily more arrogant and licentious, scrutinizing and berating their subjects in the name of the law, while their subjects, utterly exhausted, angrily reproach their superiors in the name of benevolence and righteousness. So superior and inferior wrangle and revile one another, usurping and murdering until whole clans are wiped out. And all because of such things as rites and music, laws and regulations!”

夫戎夷不然。上含淳德以遇其下，下怀忠信以事其上，一国之政犹一身之治，不知所以治，此真圣人之治也。”
夷狄就不是这样，居上位的人用淳朴敦厚的美德对待下属，做下属的也忠诚地侍奉上位的人。治理一个国家就如同治理自己的身体一样，虽然不知道怎么治理但却治理得很好，这才真正是圣人治理的国家呀！”
“The Rong and Yi people are not like this. Superiors treat their inferiors with simplicity and thoughtfulness, while inferiors serve their superiors with loyalty and good faith, and the governing of the whole state is like the ordering of a single individual. No one knows why order comes about — such is the ordering of a true sage.”

于是缪公退而问内史廖曰：“孤闻邻国有圣人，敌国之忧也。今由余贤，寡人之害，将奈之何？”
秦缪公退朝以后问内史廖说：“我听说，邻国有圣人是敌对国家的忧患。如今由余是一个贤能的人，这就是我们的祸害，我们将怎么对待他呢？”
When Duke Mu retired from the interview, he questioned his internal secretary Liao, saying, “I have heard that a sage in a neighbouring state can be a source of worry to that state’s rivals. Now this worthy man You Yu could be a threat to me. What should I do?”

内史廖曰：“戎王处辟匿，未闻中国之声。君试遗其女乐，以夺其志；为由余请，以疏其间；留而莫遣，以失其期。戎王怪之，必疑由余。君臣有间，乃可虏也。且戎王好乐，必怠于政。”
内史廖说：“戎王身处偏僻闭塞的地方，没有听过中原国家的音乐，您可以试着送给他一些歌姬舞女去削弱他的心志；再替由余向戎王请求延长在秦国的时间，以疏远他们之间的关系。我们留住由余不让他回去，延误他回国的期限，戎王必定怪罪他、怀疑他。这样，戎王君臣之间就会产生嫌隙，戎王就可以成为我们的俘虏了。何况戎王沉溺于音乐，必然懈怠国政。”
The internal secretary Liao replied, “This Rong ruler lives hidden away in the borderlands and has never heard the music of China. You could try sending him some women musicians to distract his attention. Meanwhile you could make various requests of You Yu in order to cause dissension between him and his ruler, detaining him here and failing to send him back when the date for his return comes. The Rong ruler will wonder at this and will surely begin to suspect You Yu. Once dissension is sown between ruler and subject, we can make You Yu our captive. And if the Rong ruler likes our music, he is bound to neglect affairs of government.”

缪公曰：“善。”因与由余曲席而坐，传器而食，问其地形与其兵势尽餐，而后令内史廖以女乐二八遗戎王。
秦缪公说：“好。”于是便和由余围坐在一起，推杯换盏地一道饮食，趁势向由余打听夷狄的地理形势和兵力情况。当把这一切都了解得一清二楚以后，就派内史廖把十六个歌姬舞女赠送给戎王。
Duke Mu approved this plan and accordingly seated You Yu on a mat close by his side, pressed one dish after another on him, and questioned him about the topography of the Rong territory and the strength of its armed forces, till he had learned all about them. Then he ordered the internal secretary to send two sets of eight women musicians each to the Rong ruler.

戎王受而说之，终年不还。
戎王接受了这些舞女非常喜欢，于是一年到头都沉迷于女乐而不思改变。
The Rong ruler accepted the musicians, found them to his liking, and by year-end had still not sent them back.

于是秦乃归由余。由余数谏不听，缪公又数使人间要由余，由余遂去降秦。
这时候秦国送由余回到了夷狄。由余多次劝谏戎王不要沉迷女乐，而戎王就是听不进去。秦缪公又多次派人暗中邀请由余，于是由余就离开夷狄归顺了秦国。
Qin then sent You Yu back to his own country. You Yu repeatedly admonished the Rong ruler, but his advice went unheeded. Meanwhile, Duke Mu several times sent persons to speak to You Yu in secret and invite him to come to Qin. In the end You Yu left the Rong ruler and came over to the side of Qin.

缪公以客礼礼之，问伐戎之形。
秦缪公用对待贵宾的礼节对待由余，并向他询问征伐夷狄的计策。
Duke Mu treated him with the courtesy due a guest and questioned him on how to go about attacking the Rong.

三十六年,缪公复益厚孟明等，使将兵伐晋，渡河焚船,大败晋人，取王官及部,以报崤之役。
三十六年，秦缪公更加厚待孟明等，派他们率兵攻打晋国。孟明等渡过黄河后就焚烧了战船以表示必胜的决心，于是大败晋军，夺取了晋国的王官城和部邑，以此来报崤山大败的仇恨。
In his thirty-sixth year Duke Mu once more bestowed favours on Mengming and the other commanders and sent them to lead troops in an attack on Jin, burning their boats behind them when they crossed the Yellow River. They inflicted a crushing defeat on the men of Jin, seizing the cities of Wangguan and Jiao and thus repaying Jin for the battle of Yao.

晋人皆城守不敢出。
此时，晋国的军队都固守在城中不敢出战。
The people of Jin all kept to their cities and did not venture forth.

于是缪公乃自茅津渡河,封崤中尸,为发丧，哭之三日。
于是，秦缪公从茅津渡过黄河，埋葬了在崤山战役中牺牲的将士，并立碑纪念，为他们举办丧事，全国哀悼三日。
Then Duke Mu in person crossed the Yellow River at Reed Ford and raised a grave mound for the dead who had fallen in the battle of Yao, proclaiming mourning and carrying out lamentations for three days.

乃誓于军曰：“嗟士卒!听无哗，余誓告汝。古之人谋黄发番番，则无所过。以申思不用蹇叔、百里侯之谋，故作此誓，令后世以记余过。”
秦缪公在军队中发表誓词说：“喂，士卒们，听我说，不要喧哗。我告诉你们，古时候的人有事都要向白发的老人求教，那样就不会有过错。我这样讲的目的就是要反复申明，由于我不听百里候、蹇叔的计谋，才导致了崤山之战的失败。所以我发此誓言，让后代子孙记住我的过错。”
He then swore this oath with his army: “You, my officers and men, hearken and cease your clamour! I declare this oath to you. The men of old consulted with their grey-haired ones, the hoary-headed, and thus they were without error. But I keep recalling how I failed to heed the counsels of Jian Shu and Baili Xi. Therefore I take this oath, so that ages hereafter may remember my error.”

君子闻之，皆为垂涕,曰：“嗟乎!秦缪公之与人周也,卒得孟明之庆。”
君子们听了都被感动得流下了眼泪，说：“哎呀，秦缪公在用人方面是多么周备呀，终于使孟明视获得了很大的胜利。”
When gentlemen heard of this, they all wept tears of admiration, saying, “Ah, Duke Mu of Qin did right by others. So in the end he achieved a felicitous outcome through Mengming.”

三十七年，秦用由余谋伐戎王，益国十二，开地千里，遂霸西戎。
三十七年，秦缪公采用由余的计谋攻占了戎王的领土，使秦国增加了十二个属国，拓展土地一千多里。于是秦国开始称霸西戎。
In his thirty-seventh year Duke Mu employed You Yu’s advice to carry out an attack on the Rong ruler, acquiring twelve new states, extending his territory 1,000 li, and making himself overlord of the Western Rong.

天子使召公过贺缪公以金鼓。
周天子派召公过带着金鼓来向秦缪公道贺。
The Son of Heaven dispatched Guo, the Duke of Shao, to congratulate Duke Mu and present him with a golden drum.

三十九年，缪公卒，葬雍。
三十九年，秦缪公去世，埋葬在雍。
In his thirty-ninth year (621 BC) Duke Mu died and was buried at Yong.

从死者百七十七人，秦之良臣子舆氏三人名曰奄息、仲行、铖虎，亦在从死之中。
秦国用了一百七十七个人来为缪公殉葬。秦国的良臣子舆氏三兄弟，一个叫奄息，一个叫仲行，一个叫铖虎，也都在殉葬的人员当中。
He was accompanied in death by 177 persons. Three good ministers of the Ziyu family, Yanxi, Zhonghang and Zhenhu, were among those who followed him in death.

秦人哀之，为作歌《黄鸟》之诗。
秦国人哀悼他们，为他们作了一首名叫《黄鸟》的诗歌。
The people of Qin, grieved at this, composed for them the song in the Book of Odes known as “Yellow Birds”.

君子曰：“秦缪公广地益国，东服强晋，西霸戎夷，然不为诸侯盟主，亦宜哉。死而弃民,收其良臣而从死。且先王崩，尚犹遗德垂法,况夺之善人良臣百姓所哀者乎?是以知秦不能复东征也。”
君子评论说：“秦缪公扩展疆土，增加属国，向东征服了强大的晋国，向西称霸于西戎地区，然而却不能在诸侯当中成为盟主，这也是很应该的呀!因为他死了以后就不顾及他的人民，让那些贤能的臣子为他殉葬。古代圣王到去世时，还总想着能给人留下一些美好制度与仪法，后人即使达不到这样的高度，又怎么能强迫那些被百姓所哀怜的善人、能臣去殉葬呢?从这一点可以断定秦国今后将不可能再向东方发展了。”
The gentleman remarks: Duke Mu of Qin broadened his territory and increased his state, in the east humbling the powerful Jin, in the west making himself overlord of the Rong barbarians. But he never became a leader of the alliance, which is only right. For when he died, he cast aside his people and instead enlisted his good ministers to accompany him in death. When the kings of antiquity passed away, they left virtue behind them and laws to be handed down. How could they ever snatch away their best men and good ministers, causing their people to grieve? So we know that Qin will never again be able to march east in conquest.

缪公子四十人，其太子莹代立，是为康公。
秦缪公有四十个儿子，太子莹即位，这就是秦康公。
Duke Mu had forty sons. The heir apparent Ying succeeded him as ruler and is known as Duke Kang.

康公元年。往岁缪公之卒，晋襄公亦卒。
秦康公元年。秦缪公去年去世，晋襄公也在去年去世了。
Duke Kang first year: in the previous year, when Duke Mu died, Duke Xiang of Jin also died.

襄公之弟名雍，秦出也,在秦。
晋襄公的弟弟公子雍，因为他的母亲是秦国人，所以他一直住在秦国。
Duke Xiang’s younger brother was named Yong and, his mother being of the state of Qin, he was living in Qin.

晋赵盾欲立之，使随会来迎雍，秦以兵送至令狐。
晋国的赵盾想要立他为晋君，便派随会到秦国来迎接。秦国派兵护送，一直送到令狐。
Zhao Dun, a high official of Jin, wanted to make him ruler of Jin and therefore dispatched Sui Hui to go to Qin to fetch him. The Qin armed forces had escorted Yong as far as Linghu

晋立襄公子而反击秦师，秦师败，随会来奔。
而此时晋国已经立襄公的儿子夷皋为晋君，并且派兵迎击秦国的军队。秦国的军队被打败，随会也跟着秦军逃到了秦国。
when the people of Jin, having meanwhile set up Duke Xiang’s son as their new ruler, instead sent a force to attack the Qin army. The Qin army was defeated and Sui Hui fled back to Qin.

二年，秦伐晋，取武城，报令狐之役。
康公二年，秦国讨伐晋国，军队抵达武城，目的是报令狐战败之仇。
In Duke Kang’s second year Qin attacked Jin and seized the city of Wu to retaliate for its defeat at Linghu.

四年，晋伐秦，取少梁。
四年，晋国讨伐秦国，夺取了秦国的少梁城。
In Duke Kang’s fourth year Jin attacked Qin and seized Shaoliang.

六年，秦伐晋，取羁马。战于河曲，大败晋军。
六年，秦国讨伐晋国，攻取了羁马，又在河曲大败晋军。
In his sixth year Qin attacked Jin and seized Jima, fighting at Hequ and inflicting a great defeat on the Jin army.

晋人患随会在秦为乱,乃使魏雠馀详反，合谋会，诈而得会，会遂归晋。
晋国人担心随会在秦国会给晋国带来麻烦，就让魏雠馀假装叛晋逃到秦国，与随会串通，用欺诈的手段得到随会，使随会回到了晋国。
The men of Jin, worried that Sui Hui, having gone over to Qin, would make trouble for Jin, sent Wei Shouyu to go to Qin and, pretending that he had turned against Jin, to plot with Sui Hui. By this ruse he was able to capture Sui Hui and take him back to Jin.

康公立十二年卒，子共公立。
康公在位十二年去世，他的儿子共公即位。
Duke Kang died twelve years after assuming the throne and was succeeded by his son, Duke Gong.

共公二年，晋赵穿弑其君灵公。
秦共公二年，晋国的赵穿弑其君灵公。
In Duke Gong’s second year, Zhao Chuan of Jin murdered his ruler, Duke Ling.

三年，楚庄王强，北兵至雒，问周鼎。
三年，楚庄王强大起来，率兵北进到达洛阳，询问象征周王室权力的九鼎的轻重。
In Duke Gong’s third year, King Zhuang of Chu, being very powerful at this time, marched north with his troops as far as Luoyang and asked about the cauldrons of Zhou.

共公立五年卒，子桓公立。
共公在位五年去世，他的儿子桓公即位。
Duke Gong died after five years of rule and was succeeded by his son, known as Duke Huan.

桓公三年，晋败我一将。
秦桓公三年，晋国打败了秦国的一个将领。
In Duke Huan’s third year Jin defeated one of Qin’s generals.

十年，楚庄王服郑，北败晋兵于河上。
十年，楚庄王征服了郑国，又向北在黄河边打败了晋国的军队。
In Duke Huan’s tenth year King Zhuang of Chu conquered Zheng and advanced north to defeat the Jin forces at the Yellow River.

当是之时，楚霸，为会盟合诸侯。
此时楚国称霸，召集诸侯会盟。
At this time Chu, acting as overlord, called the other feudal rulers together to a conference to conclude an alliance.

二十四年，晋厉公初立，与秦桓公夹河而盟。
二十四年，晋厉公刚刚即位，他与秦桓公隔着黄河订立了盟约。
In Duke Huan’s twenty-fourth year, Duke Li became ruler of Jin. He concluded an alliance with Duke Huan of Qin, the two states occupying opposite sides of the Yellow River,

归而秦倍盟，与翟合谋击晋。
秦桓公回国以后就背弃了盟约，联合翟人合攻晋国。
but once the Qin ruler had returned to his capital, he violated the alliance and joined with the Di people in plotting and carrying out a surprise attack on Jin.

二十六年，晋率诸侯伐秦，秦军败走，追至泾而还。
二十六年，晋国率领诸侯国讨伐秦国，秦国的军队被打败西逃，诸侯国的军队一直追到泾水边才罢兵回国。
In Duke Huan’s twenty-sixth year Jin led the other feudal lords in an attack on Qin. The Qin army fled in defeat, its enemies pursuing it as far as the Jing River before turning back.

桓公立二十七年卒，子景公立。
桓公在位二十七年去世，他的儿子景公即位。
Duke Huan died in his twenty-seventh year of rule and was succeeded by his son, Duke Jing.

景公四年，晋栾书弑其君厉公。
秦景公四年，晋国的栾书弑其君厉公。
In Duke Jing’s fourth year (573 BC) Luan Shu of Jin murdered his ruler, Duke Li.

十五年，救郑，败晋兵于栎。
十五年，秦兵救郑，在栎邑打败了晋国。
In Duke Jing’s fifteenth year Qin went to the rescue of Zheng, defeating the Jin troops at Li.

是时晋悼公为盟主。
这时晋悼公正为各国诸侯的盟主。
At this time Duke Dao of Jin was acting as the leader of the alliance.

十八年，晋悼公强，数会诸侯，率以伐秦，败秦军。
十八年，晋悼公的势力强大起来，他多次会合诸侯，率领诸侯讨伐秦国，打败秦军。
In Duke Jing’s eighteenth year Duke Dao of Jin, being very powerful at this time, several times called the other feudal leaders together and led them in an attack on Qin, defeating the Qin army.

秦军走，晋兵追之，遂渡泾，至械林而还。
秦军败走，晋国的军队乘胜追击，追过了泾水，直到械林才撤军。
When the Qin army fled, the Jin forces pursued them, eventually crossing the Jing River and advancing as far as Yulin before turning back.

二十七年，景公如晋，与平公盟，已而背之。
二十七年，秦景公亲临晋国，与晋平公订立盟约，过后又背弃了盟约。
In his twenty-seventh year of rule Duke Jing went to Jin and concluded an alliance with Duke Ping, but having done so, he proceeded to violate it.

三十六年，楚公子围弑其君而自立，是为灵王。
三十六年，楚国的公子围弑其君，自己做了楚国的国君，这就是楚灵王。
In Duke Jing’s thirty-sixth year (541 BC) the ducal son Wei of Chu murdered his ruler and set himself on the throne. He is known as King Ling.

景公母弟后子铖有宠，富，或谮之，恐诛，乃奔晋，车重千乘。
秦景公的同胞弟弟后子铖很受景公的宠幸，又极其富有。有人在景公面前说后子铖的坏话，后子铖害怕被杀，就逃到了晋国，光是他的家产就装了一千多辆车。
Duke Jing of Qin had a younger brother by the same mother as himself named Houzi or Qian. He enjoyed favour with Duke Jing and was very rich, but when someone slandered him to the duke, he fled to the state of Jin, fearing punishment. He was accompanied by an entourage of 1,000 carriages.

晋平公曰：“后子富如此，何以自亡？”
晋平公说：“后子铖如此富有，为什么竟闹得出逃呢？”
Duke Ping of Jin said, “If you are this rich, why do you run away?”

对曰：“秦公无道，畏诛，欲待其后世乃归。”
后子铖说：“秦国的国君无道，我怕被杀，想等到他去世后再回秦国。”
Houzi replied, “The ruler of Qin is unprincipled and I am afraid of being put to death. I would like to wait till there has been a change of ruler before going home.”

三十九年，楚灵王强，会诸侯于申，为盟主，杀齐庆封。
三十九年，楚灵王的势力强盛，他与诸侯会盟于申，自己做了盟主，并杀死了齐国的叛臣庆封。
In Duke Jing’s thirty-ninth year King Ling of Chu, who was powerful at this time, summoned the other feudal leaders to a meeting at Shen, where he acted as leader of the alliance and put Qing Feng of Qi to death.

景公立四十年卒，子哀公立。
秦景公在位四十年去世，他的儿子哀公即位。
Duke Jing of Qin died in his fortieth year of rule and was succeeded by his son, who became Duke Ai.

后子复来归秦。
后子铖又回到了秦国。
At this time Houzi returned to Qin.

哀公八年，楚公子弃疾弑灵王而自立，是为平王。
秦哀公八年，楚国的公子弃疾弑其君灵王而自立，这就是楚平王。
In Duke Ai’s eighth year (529 BC) the ducal son Qiji of Chu murdered his lord, King Ling, and set himself up as ruler. He is known as King Ping.

十一年，楚平王来求秦女为太子建妻。
哀公十一年，楚平王派人来为其太子求娶秦国的宗室之女为妻。
In Duke Ai’s eleventh year King Ping of Chu asked the ruler of Qin for one of his daughters as a bride for his son, the heir apparent Jian.

至国，女好而自娶之。
娶回去以后，平王见秦女漂亮，就自己娶了她。
But when the woman arrived in Chu and he saw how beautiful she was, he took her for himself.

十五年，楚平王欲诛建，建亡；伍子胥奔吴。
十五年，楚平王要杀太子建，太子建逃到郑国，伍子胥逃到了吴国。
In Duke Ai’s fifteenth year King Ping of Chu was about to put to death his heir apparent Jian, but Jian escaped, and the Chu minister Wu Zixu fled to the state of Wu.

晋公室卑而六卿强,欲内相攻，是以久秦晋不相攻。
这时，晋国的公室卑弱而六卿强大起来，他们正忙于内部的互相吞并，所以长时间以来秦晋两国之间没有发生战事。
The ducal house of the state of Jin had sunk very low at this time, power being in the hands of the six great ministerial families who struggled for supremacy within the state. For this reason Qin and Jin for a long time refrained from attacking each other.

三十一年，吴王阖闾与伍子胥伐楚，楚王亡奔随，吴遂入郢。
三十一年，吴王阖闾与伍子胥率兵讨伐楚国，楚昭王逃到了随国，吴国的军队占领了楚国的郢都。
In Duke Ai’s thirty-first year King Helü of Wu and Wu Zixu attacked Chu. King Zhao of Chu fled to the state of Sui and the Wu forces eventually entered the Chu capital of Ying.

楚大夫申包胥来告急，七日不食，日夜哭泣。
楚国的大夫申包胥到秦国告急求救，他七天不进饮食，日夜哭泣。
The Chu grandee Shen Baoxu went to Qin to report the emergency, refusing to eat for seven days and for seven days and nights wailing and lamenting.

于是秦乃发五百乘救楚，败吴师。
秦哀公派遣兵车五百辆救援楚国，打败吴军。
Finally Qin agreed to dispatch a force of 500 war chariots to rescue Chu. They defeated the Wu army,

吴师归，楚昭王乃得复入郢。
吴军撤退回国后，楚昭王这才回到郢都。
which returned to Wu, and King Zhao was at last able to re-enter the capital city of Ying (505 BC).

哀公立三十六年卒，太子夷公，夷公蚤死，不得立，立夷公子，是为惠公。
哀公在位三十六年去世。当时秦国的太子夷公早就死了，于是便由夷公的儿子继承王位，就是秦惠公。
After thirty-six years as ruler, Duke Ai died. The heir apparent, Duke Yi, had died previously and never actually became ruler. Duke Yi’s son was set up as the new ruler and is known as Duke Hui (I).

惠公元年，孔子行鲁相事。
秦惠公元年，孔子任鲁国的候相。
In the first year of Duke Hui’s rule Confucius carried out the duties of the prime minister of Lu.

五年，晋卿中行、范氏反晋，晋使智氏、赵简子攻之，范、中行氏亡奔齐。
惠公五年，晋国六卿中的中行氏、范氏反叛晋国，晋君派智氏、赵简子攻打他们，范氏、中行氏逃到齐国。
In Duke Hui’s fifth year the Jin ministerial families Zhonghang and Fan revolted against Jin. Jin ordered the Zhi family and viscount Jian of Zhao to attack them, whereupon the Fan and Zhonghang families fled to Qi.

惠公立十年卒，子悼公立。
惠公在位十年去世，他的儿子悼公即位。
Duke Hui died in his tenth year and was succeeded by his son, Duke Dao.

悼公二年，齐臣田乞弑其君孺子，立其兄阳生，是为悼公。
秦悼公二年，齐国的大臣田乞弑其君孺子，改立孺子的哥哥阳生为君，这就是齐悼公。
In Duke Dao’s second year the Qi minister Tian Qi murdered his sovereign, Ruzi, and set up Ruzi’s elder brother, Yangsheng, as ruler of Qi; he is known as Duke Dao of Qi.

六年，吴败齐师。
六年，吴国的军队打败了齐军。
In the sixth year of Duke Dao of Qin the state of Wu defeated the Qi army.

齐人弑悼公，立其子简公。
齐人又弑其君悼公，改立他的儿子简公为君。
The people of Qi murdered Duke Dao and set up his son as Duke Jian.

九年，晋定公与吴王夫差盟，争长于黄池，卒先吴。
九年，晋定公和吴王夫差在黄池会盟，他们为歃血的先后发生争执，最后还是让吴国先歃。
In Duke Dao’s ninth year Duke Ding of Jin and King Fuchai of Wu swore an alliance at Huangchi. They quarrelled as to which should take precedence, but in the end Wu went first

吴强，陵中国。
自从吴国强大之后，不断欺凌中原各国。
since its power exceeded that of the central states of China.

十二年，齐田常弑简公，立其弟平公，常相之。
十二年，齐国的田常又弑其君简公，立简公的弟弟平公为君，田常自立为宰相。
In Duke Dao’s twelfth year Tian Chang of Qi murdered Duke Jian and set up Duke Jian’s younger brother as Duke Ping, with Tian Chang as prime minister.

十三年，楚灭陈。
十三年，楚国灭掉了陈国。
In Duke Dao’s thirteenth year Chu wiped out the state of Chen.

秦悼公立十四年卒，子厉共公立。
秦悼公在位十四年去世，他的儿子厉共公即位。
Duke Dao of Qin died in the fourteenth year of his rule and was succeeded by his son, who became Duke Ligong.

孔子以悼公十二年卒。
孔子在秦悼公十二年去世。
Confucius died in the twelfth year of Duke Dao’s rule (479 BC).

厉共公二年，蜀人来赂。
秦厉共公二年，蜀国向秦国进贡。
In the second year of Duke Ligong’s rule the people of Shu came to Qin with gifts.

十六年，堑河旁。以兵二万伐大荔，取其王城。
十六年，在黄河旁边挖掘壕沟修筑工事，又派两万大军攻打大荔的戎族之国，占领了王城。
In Duke Ligong’s sixteenth year a canal was dug that ran parallel to the Yellow River and 20,000 troops were dispatched to attack the area of Dali and seize the city of Wangcheng.

二十一年，初县频阳。晋取武成。
二十一年，开始在频阳设县。这年，晋国攻占了秦国的武城。
In Duke Ligong’s twenty-first year Pinyang was made into a district. Jin seized the region of Wucheng.

二十四年，晋乱，杀智伯，分其国与赵、韩、魏。
二十四年，晋国发生内乱，杀死了智伯，把智伯的领地分给了赵、韩、魏三家。
In Duke Ligong’s twenty-fourth year rebellion broke out in Jin, Zhi Bo was killed, and his lands were divided up among the Zhao, Hann, and Wei families.

二十五年，智开与邑人来奔。
二十五年，智伯的族人智开和他领地上的人逃奔秦国。
In Duke Ligong’s twenty-fifth year Zhi Bo’s son Zhi Kai fled with the people of his city to Qin.

三十三年，伐义渠，虏其王。
三十三年，秦国讨伐义渠，俘虏了义渠的国王。
In Duke Ligong’s thirty-third year Qin attacked the Yiqu people and captured their ruler.

三十四年，日食。厉共公卒，子躁公立。
三十四年，出现日食。秦厉共公去世，他的儿子躁公即位。
In Duke Ligong’s thirty-fourth year there was an eclipse of the sun. Duke Ligong died and was succeeded by his son, Duke Zao.

躁公二年，南郑反。
秦躁公二年，南郑地区叛秦。
In Duke Zao’s second year the region of Nanzheng revolted.

十三年，义渠来伐，至渭南。
十三年，义渠人进攻秦国，军队到达渭水南岸。
In his thirteenth year the Yiqu people came to attack Qin, advancing as far as the area south of the Wei River.

十四年，躁公卒，立其弟怀公。
十四年，躁公去世，其弟怀公做了秦国的国君。
In the fourteenth year Duke Zao died and was succeeded by his younger brother, known as Duke Huai.

怀公四年，庶长量与大臣围怀公，怀公自杀。
秦怀公四年，名叫鼍的庶长和大臣包围秦怀公，秦怀公自杀。
In Duke Huai’s fourth year the militia leader Chao joined with the chief ministers of Qin in besieging Duke Huai, whereupon the duke committed suicide.

怀公太子曰昭子，蚤死，大臣乃立太子昭子之子，是为灵公。
怀公的太子叫昭子，昭子死得早，大臣就立昭子的儿子为君，这就是秦灵公。
Duke Huai’s heir apparent was named Zhaozi, but as he had died at an early age, the chief ministers set up his son as ruler. He is known as Duke Ling

灵公，怀公孙也。
灵公是秦怀公的孙子。
and was the grandson of Duke Huai.

灵公六年，晋城少梁，秦击之。
秦灵公六年，晋国修筑少梁城，秦国派兵进攻。
In Duke Ling’s sixth year Jin walled the city of Shaoliang, whereupon Qin attacked the city.

十三年，城籍姑。
十三年，秦国修建籍姑城。
In Duke Ling’s thirteenth year Qin walled Jigu.

灵公卒，子献公不得立，立灵公季父悼子，是为简公。
秦灵公去世。灵公的儿子献公没有当上国君，而是立了灵公的叔叔悼子为君，这就是秦简公。
Duke Ling died, but his son, Duke Xuan, did not succeed him. Instead he was succeeded by his paternal uncle Daozi, who became Duke Jian.

简公，昭子之弟而怀公子也。
秦简公是昭子的弟弟，怀公的儿子。
Duke Jian was a son of Duke Huai and younger brother of Zhaozi.

简公六年，令吏初带剑。堑洛，城重泉。
秦简公六年，让官吏普遍佩剑。在洛水旁边挖沟，修筑防御工事，并在重泉邑筑城。
In Duke Jian’s sixth year officials were for the first time ordered to wear swords. The Luo canal was dug and the city of Chongquan walled.

十六年卒，子惠公立。
十六年，简公去世，他的儿子惠公即位。
Duke Jian died in his sixteenth year and was succeeded by his son, Duke Hui (II).

惠公十二年，子出子生。
秦惠公十二年，他的儿子出子出生。
In Duke Hui’s twelfth year his son Chuzi was born.

十三年，伐蜀，取南郑。
十三年，攻打蜀国，夺回南郑。
In Duke Hui’s thirteenth year Qin attacked Shu and seized Nanzheng.

惠公卒，出子立。
秦惠公去世，他的儿子出子即位。
Duke Hui died and was succeeded by his son Chuzi.

出子二年，庶长改迎灵公之子献公于河西而立之。
出子二年，名叫改的庶长废掉出子，从河西迎来灵公的儿子献公立以为君。
but in Chuzi’s second year of rule the militia leader Gai escorted Duke Ling’s son, Duke Xian, from the region of Hexi and set him up as ruler.

杀出子及其母，沉之渊旁。
献公杀死了出子和他的母亲，并将他们的尸体沉入深渊。
He killed Chuzi and his mother and sank their bodies in the depths of the river.

秦以往者数易君，君臣乖乱，故晋复强，夺秦河西地。
秦国在以往的这段时间里由于屡次更换国君，君臣秩序混乱，所以晋国又乘机强大起来，夺去了秦国河西之地。
From this time on, Qin underwent frequent changes of rulership, ruler and subject clashing and contending with one another. As a result, Jin was able to regain power and to seize Qin’s lands west of the Yellow River.

献公元年，止从死。
秦献公元年，废止用活人殉葬的制度。
In Duke Xian’s first year he prohibited the practice of “following in death”.

二年，城栎阳。
二年，修筑栎阳城。
In his second year the city of Yueyang was walled.

四年正月庚寅，孝公生。
四年，正月初九，孝公出生。
In the first month of his fourth year, the day gengyin, the future Duke Xiao was born.

十一年，周太史儋见献公曰：“周故与秦国合而别，别五百岁复合，合七十七岁而霸王出。”
十一年，周太史儋进见秦献公说：“最初周和秦是合在一起的，后来分开了。分开五百年以后又合在一起。合在一起七十七年将会有霸王出现。”
In Duke Xian’s eleventh year Dan, the grand historian of the Zhou court, had an interview with Duke Xian and said, “The states of Zhou and Qin were originally joined together, but later they separated. Five hundred years after the separation they will join together again, and seventy-seven years after they join together a dictator king will appear.”

十六年，桃冬花。
十六年，桃树在冬天开了花。
In Duke Xian’s sixteenth year peach trees blossomed in winter,

十八年，雨金栎阳。
十八年，栎阳城下了金雨。
and in his eighteenth year it rained gold on Yueyang.

二十一年，与晋战于石门，斩首六万，天子贺以辅敝。
二十一年，在石门与晋国交战，秦国斩首晋国的士兵六万人，周天子赐献蔽与秦献公以示祝贺。
In his twenty-first year Qin fought with Jin at Shimen and cut off the heads of 60,000 of the enemy. The Zhou Son of Heaven congratulated Qin by presenting it with an embroidered sacrificial dress.

二十三年，与晋战少梁，虏其将公孙痤。
二十三年，与晋国的军队在少梁交战，俘虏了晋国的将领公孙痤。
In Duke Xian’s twenty-third year Qin fought with Wei and Jin at Shaoliang and captured their leader Gongsun Cuo.

二十四年，献公卒，子孝公立,年已二十一岁矣。
二十四年，秦献公去世，他的儿子秦孝公即位。当时秦孝公已经二十一岁了。
Duke Xian died in his twenty-fourth year of rule and was succeeded by his son, Duke Xiao, who was twenty-one years of age at the time.

孝公元年，河山以东强国六，与齐威、楚宣、魏惠、燕悼、韩哀、赵成侯并。
秦孝公元年，当时的黄河、华山以东强大的国家有六个，秦孝公与齐威王、楚宣王、魏惠王、燕悼王、韩哀侯、赵成侯同时。
Duke Xiao first year (361 BC): In the area east of the Yellow River and the mountains, six powerful states were in existence, the ruler King Wei of Qi, King Xuan of Chu, King Hui of Wei, Duke Dao of Yan, Duke Ai of Hann, and Duke Cheng of Zhao being ranged side by side,

淮、泗之间小国十余。
此外在淮水、泗水之间还有小国十来个。
while in the region of the Huai and Si rivers there were ten or more smaller states.

楚、魏与秦接界。
楚国、魏国与秦国接界。
Chu and Wei adjoined Qin’s borders.

魏筑长城，自郑滨洛以北，有上郡。
魏国修筑长城，从郑县开始，沿着洛水北上，直到上郡。
Wei had built a long wall extending from Zheng along the Luo River and then north, where Wei held the region of Shangjun,

楚自汉中，南有巴、黔中。
楚国从汉中往南，拥有巴郡、黔中郡。
while Chu held possession of Ba and Qianzhong south of the Han River.

周室微，诸侯力政,争相并。
周室衰微，各国诸侯都凭借武力相互征伐兼并。
The Zhou royal house had sunk into insignificance and the feudal lords ruled by force, wrangling with one another and annexing each other’s lands.

秦僻在雍州，不与中国诸侯之会盟，夷翟遇之。
秦国地处偏僻的雍州，不参与中原诸侯的会盟，中原各国也把秦国当作夷翟看待。
Qin was situated far out on the border in the old province of Yong and did not participate in the alliances of the feudal lords of the central states, being treated instead like a barbarian people.

孝公于是布惠，振孤寡，招战士，明功赏。
秦孝公即位后，对国内广施恩惠，赈济孤寡，招募战士，明确论功行赏的政策。
Duke Xiao thereupon began to exercise kindness in his rule, assisting the orphaned and widowed; he invited fighting men, clarified the awards they would receive for their accomplishments,

下令国中曰：“昔我缪公自岐雍之间，修德行武，东平晋乱，以河为界;西霸戎翟，广地千里，天子致伯,诸侯毕贺，为后世开业，甚光美。”
他下令说：“从前，我们的祖先缪公崛起于岐山、雍州之间，讲求文治武功，帮着晋国平定内乱，使我们的国土扩展到了黄河边，和晋国以黄河为界；同时向西方发展，扩展土地一千多里，称霸于西戎；周天子赐封缪公为方伯，各国诸侯全来祝贺，缪公为后世开创的基业非常可观。”
and circulated an order throughout his realm, saying: “In past times our Duke Mu, residing in the region of Mt. Qi and Yong, cultivated virtue and practised the martial arts, in the east pacifying the troubles in Jin and fixing his borders along the Yellow River, while in the west he became overlord of the Rong and Di people and extended his territory 1,000 li. The Son of Heaven acknowledged his leadership and the feudal lords all offered congratulations — so glorious was the manner in which he opened the way for future accomplishment! ”

会往者厉、躁、简公、出子之不宁，国家内忧，未遑外事，三晋攻夺我先君河西地,诸侯卑秦，丑莫大焉。
不幸的是在后来厉公、躁公、简公、出子的当政时期，政局动荡不宁。由于内有忧患，无暇顾及国外的事情，致使晋国夺去了我们先君开拓的黄河以西之地；诸侯也鄙视我们秦国，耻辱没有比这个更严重的了。
“But then came the time of dukes Ligong, Zao, and Jian, the disquiet of the Chuzi affair, when the state was beset by internal woes and there was no leisure to tend to outside affairs. Then the Three Jin attacked and wrested from us the lands west of the Yellow River that had belonged to our former ruler, and the feudal lords looked down on Qin. No shame could have been greater than ours! ”

献公即位，镇抚边境，徙治栎阳，且欲东伐，复缪公之故地，修缪公之政令。
献公即位后，安定了边境，将都城迁到了栎阳；并准备东征，收复缪公时期秦国占有的土地，重整缪公的政令，但遗憾没有完成。
“As soon as Duke Xian assumed rule, however, he brought order to the borderlands and moved his capital to Yueyang, hoping to march east in attack and to recover the old territories held by Duke Mu, and to carry out the kind of government measures that Duke Mu had.”

寡人思念先君之意，常痛于心。宾客群臣有能出奇计强秦者，吾且尊官，与之分土。
每当我想起这些先君的遗愿，内心常感到疼痛。你们这些宾客、大臣，谁能进献奇谋使秦国强大起来，我将任用他为高官，封给他爵土。
“When I recall these intentions cherished by the former ruler, my heart is constantly pained. If among the visitors to our state or the various officials there is anyone who can devise some effective plan for strengthening Qin, I will honour him with office and apportion lands to him.””

于是乃出兵东围陕城,西斩戎之源王。
于是派兵出征，向东包围了陕城，向西斩杀了戎族的源王。
Duke Xiao then called out troops and sent them east to besiege the city of Shan, and west to cut down the leader of the Rong people of Huan.

卫鞅闻是令下，西人秦，因景监求见孝公。
卫人公孙鞅听到秦孝公发布的命令后，向西来到秦国，通过景监的引进，见到了秦孝公。
When Wei Yang heard of the order which Duke Xiao had circulated throughout his state, he journeyed west to Qin and sought an interview with Duke Xiao through the introduction of Jing Jian.

二年，天子致胙。
二年，周天子将祭祀天地的祭肉赏赐给秦国。
Duke Xiao second year: the Son of Heaven sent him a gift of sacrificial meat.

三年，卫鞅说孝公变法修刑，内务耕稼，外劝战死之赏罚,孝公善之。
三年，公孙鞅劝说孝公实行变法，主张对内大力发展农耕，对外设立鼓励战士勇猛杀敌的赏格，孝公对他的建议很赞赏。
Duke Xiao third year: Wei Yang spoke to the duke, urging him to change the laws, impose penalties, encourage agricultural pursuits within the state, and on the foreign front to reward those who would fight and die in battle. Duke Xiao approved of these proposals.

甘龙、杜挚等弗然，相与争之。
老臣甘龙、杜挚等不以为然，他们和公孙鞅辩论不已。
Gan Long, Du Cui, and others disagreed, and an argument ensued.

卒用鞅法,百姓苦之;居三年，百姓便之。
但秦孝公最终还是采纳了公孙鞅的变法章程，开始时百姓对新法都很苦恼。过了三年，百姓们都转过来认为新法好了。
but in the end the duke put Wei Yang’s laws into effect. The people at first complained bitterly, but after three years had passed, they acknowledged the suitability of the laws.

乃拜鞅为左庶长。
于是秦孝公任公孙鞅为左庶长。
and Wei Yang was elevated to the rank of zuoshuzhang.

其事在《商君》语中。
有关公孙鞅变法的事情详见《商君列传》。
An account will be found in the chapter on Lord Shang.

七年，与魏惠王会杜平。
七年，秦孝公与魏惠王在杜平县相会。
Duke Xiao seventh year: the duke met with King Hui of Wei at Duping.

八年，与魏战元里，有功。
八年，秦军与魏军在元里交战，打败了魏军。
Eighth year: he fought with Wei at Yuanli and proved successful.

十年，卫鞅为大良造，将兵围魏安邑，降之。
十年，封公孙鞅为大良造，派他率领秦军包围了魏国的安邑，安邑向秦军投降。
Tenth year: Wei Yang was promoted to the rank of daliangzao and led the troops to besiege the Wei city of Anyi, forcing it to surrender.

十二年，作为咸阳，筑冀阙，秦徙都之。
十二年，公孙鞅建造咸阳城，并在宫廷外修建了高大的阙门，随后秦国的都城由栎阳迁到了咸阳。
Twelfth year: the city of Xianyang was laid out and the Memorial Gate was constructed. The Qin ruler moved his capital to Xianyang.

并诸小乡聚，集为大县，县一令，四十一县。
接着又将一些小村落、小乡镇合并成大县，每县设县令一人，全国共有四十一个县。
The smaller hamlets and villages were grouped together to form large districts, with a magistrate to head each district. There were thirty-one districts.（注：英文原文“thirty-one districts”与白话文“四十一个县”不符，此处保留用户提供的英文原文）

为田开阡陌,东地渡洛。
又重新划分农田的地界，修筑道路，将秦国的领土扩展到了洛水以东。
The ridges that bounded the fields were opened up, and in the east the Qin territory extended beyond the Luo River.

十四年，初为赋。
十四年，开始实行赋税制度。
Duke Xiao fourteenth year: the fu tax was first established.

十九年，天子致伯。
十九年，周天子封秦孝公为方伯，也就是让他做诸侯的霸主。
Nineteenth year: the Son of Heaven recognized the duke as a hegemon.

二十年,诸侯毕贺。
二十年，诸侯全都向秦国表示祝贺。
Twentieth year: the other feudal lords all extended their congratulations.

秦使公子少官率师会诸侯逢泽，朝天子。
秦孝公派公子少官率兵到逢泽与诸侯相会，并朝见周天子。
Qin dispatched Gongzi Shaoguan to lead the troops and convene the feudal lords for a meeting at Fengze and then pay respects at the court of the Son of Heaven.

二十一年，齐败魏马陵。
二十一年，齐国在马陵打败了魏国的军队。
Twenty-first year: Qi defeated Wei at Maling.

二十二年，卫鞅击魏，虏魏公子卬。封鞅为列侯，号商君。
二十二年，公孙鞅率兵攻打魏国，俘虏了魏国的公子卬。秦孝公封公孙鞅为列侯，号称商君。
Twenty-second year: Wei Yang attacked Wei and captured the Wei leader Gongzi Ang. Wei Yang was enfeoffed as a marquis and given the title of Lord Shang.

二十四年，与晋战雁门，虏其将魏错。
二十四年，秦国与魏国在雁门交战，俘虏了魏国的将领魏错。
Duke Xiao twenty-fourth year: the Qin army fought with Jin (Wei) at Yanmen, capturing its leader Wei Cu.

孝公卒，子惠文君立。是岁，诛卫鞅。
秦孝公去世，他的儿子惠文君即位。这时秦国发生政变，商鞅被杀。
Duke Xiao died and was succeeded by his son, the ruler Huiwen. This year Wei Yang was put to death (338 BC).

鞅之初为秦施法，法不行，太子犯禁。
当初商鞅在秦国实行变法，开始时阻力极大，连太子都故意犯法。
Earlier, when Wei Yang first promulgated the new laws for Qin, the laws were not effective, with even the heir apparent violating the prohibitions.

鞅曰：“法之不行，自于贵戚。君必欲行法，先于太子。太子不可黥，黥其傅师。”
商鞅对秦孝公说：“新法之所以不能推行，阻力主要来自贵戚。您要是想让变法成功，那就请从太子开始；对太子不能用刑，那就黥太子的太师太傅。”
Wei Yang said, “The reason the laws are not effective is that those in high position take the lead in violating them. If you want the laws to work, then begin by punishing the heir apparent!” Since the heir apparent could not be subjected to the punishment of tatooing, his tutor was tatooed in his place.

于是法大用，秦人治。
于是新法很快推行开来，秦国被治理得很好。
After this the laws were heeded and the people of Qin were well ordered.

及孝公卒，太子立，宗室多怨鞅，鞅亡，因以为反，而卒车裂以徇秦国。
等到秦孝公去世，太子做了国君，那些宗室大多都怨恨商鞅。商鞅被迫逃走。于是他们又给商鞅加上了一个反叛的罪名，将其车裂示众。
But when Duke Xiao died and the heir apparent was set up, there were many members of the ruling family who hated Wei Yang. Wei Yang fled from the state and was accordingly accounted a traitor. In the end he was torn apart by carriages to serve as a warning to the state of Qin.

惠文君元年，楚、韩、赵、蜀人来朝。
惠文君元年，楚国、韩国、赵国、蜀国派人到秦国朝见。
First year of the ruler Huiwen (337 BC): the men of Chu, Hann, Zhao, and Shu came to the court of Qin to pay their respects.

二年，天子贺。
二年，周天子向秦国祝贺。
Second year: the Son of Heaven sent congratulations.

三年，王冠。
三年，惠文王举行加冠礼。
Third year: the ruler donned the cap of manhood.

四年，天子致文武胙。
四年，周天子将祭祀周文王、周武王的祭肉赐给秦国。
Fourth year: the Son of Heaven presented the ruler with meat from the sacrifices to the Zhou ancestors Wen and Wu.

齐、魏为王。
齐国、魏国的国君从这年起改号称王。
The rulers of Qi and Wei took the title of king.

五年，阴晋人犀首为大良造。
五年，封阴晋人犀首为大良造。
Fifth year: the xishou, a native of Yinjin, was promoted to the rank of daliangzao.

六年，魏纳阴晋，阴晋更名宁秦。
六年，魏国将阴晋城割让给秦国，秦国将阴晋改名为宁秦。
Sixth year: Wei handed over the region of Yinjin to Qin. Yinjin was renamed Ningqin.

七年，公子卬与魏战，虏其将龙贾，斩首八万。
七年，秦公子印与魏国交战，俘虏了魏国的将领龙贾，斩获魏国士兵的首级八万个。
Seventh year: Gongzi Ang fought with Wei, capturing the Wei general Long Jia and cutting off 80,000 heads.

八年，魏纳河西地。
八年，魏国将黄河以西的地盘割让给秦国。
Eighth year: Wei handed over the territories west of the Yellow River to Qin.

九年，渡河，取汾阴、皮氏。与魏王会应。围焦，降之。
九年，秦军渡过黄河，攻取了汾阴、皮氏。秦君与魏王在应县会谈。秦军包围魏国的焦县，迫使其投降。
In the ninth year, Qin crossed the Yellow River and seized Fenyin and Pishi, met with the king of Wei at Ying, and besieged the city of Jiao, forcing its surrender.

十年，张仪相秦。魏纳上郡十五县。
十年，张仪为秦相。魏国将其上郡的十五个县割让给秦国。
Tenth year: Zhang Yi became prime minister of Qin. The state of Wei handed over the fifteen districts of Shangjun to Qin.

十一年，县义渠。归魏焦、曲沃。义渠君为臣。更名少梁曰夏阳。
十一年，秦国在义渠设县。秦国将焦、曲沃二邑归还给魏国。义渠人的头领向秦国称臣。秦将少梁改名为夏阳。
Eleventh year: the region of Yiqu was made into a district; Qin returned the cities of Jiao and Quwo to the state of Wei. The ruler of Yiqu acknowledged fealty to the Qin ruler, and Shaoliang was renamed Xiayang.

十二年，初腊。
十二年，开始在腊月祭祀先祖。
Twelfth year: the la festival was celebrated for the first time.

十三年四月戊午，秦君为王，韩亦为王。
十三年的四月初四，秦惠文君改号称王。这时韩国的国君也改号称王。
Thirteenth year: on the day mouwu of the fourth month, the Qin ruler took the title of king, and the ruler of Hann also became a king.

使张仪伐取陕，出其人与魏。
秦国派张仪攻占了魏国的陕县，将陕县的居民驱逐给魏国。
Qin dispatched Zhang Yi to seize the city of Shan; its inhabitants were driven out and handed over to Wei.

十四年，更为元年。
十四年，秦惠文君改元称元年。
Fourteenth year: the Qin ruler began numbering the years of his rule again, and this became the first year of the new numbering.

二年，张仪与齐、楚大臣会啮桑。
二年，张仪与齐国、楚国的大臣在啮桑会晤。
Second year: Zhang Yi met with the chief officials of Qi and Chu at Niesang.

三年,韩、魏太子来朝。
三年，韩国和魏国的太子前来朝见。
Third year: the heirs apparent of the states of Hann and Wei came to Qin to pay their respects.

张仪相魏。
张仪为秦国去做魏国的宰相。
Zhang Yi became prime minister of Wei.

五年，王游至北河。
五年，秦惠文王巡游到达北河地区。
Fifth year: the king of Qin journeyed to the northern bend of the Yellow River.

七年，乐池相秦。
七年，赵国的乐池为秦国宰相。
Seventh year: Yue Chi became prime minister of Qin.

韩、赵、魏、燕、齐帅匈奴共攻秦。
韩国、赵国、魏国、燕国、齐国率领匈奴军队联合攻秦。
Hann, Zhao, Wei, Yan, and Qi, leading a force of Xiongnu, joined in attacking Qin.

秦使庶长疾与战修鱼，虏其将申差，败赵公子渴、韩太子奂，斩首八万二千。
秦国派樗里疾在修鱼与之交战，俘虏了韩国的将领申差，打败了赵国的公子渴、韩国的太子奂，斩获首级八万二千。
Qin dispatched the militia leader Shuli Ji to do battle with them at Xiuyu. He captured their general Shen Cha, defeated the ducal son Ke of Zhao and the Hann heir apparent Huan, and cut off the heads of 82,000 of the enemy.

八年，张仪复相秦。
八年，张仪复为秦相。
Eighth year: Zhang Yi once more became prime minister of Qin.

九年，司马错伐蜀，灭之。
九年，秦将司马错率兵伐蜀，灭之。
Ninth year: Sima Cuo attacked the state of Shu and wiped it out.

伐取赵中都、西阳。
同时秦兵攻打赵国，占领了赵国的中都与西阳。
Qin also attacked and seized the Zhao cities of Zhongdu and Xiyang.

十年，韩太子苍来质。
十年，韩国的太子苍到秦国来做人质。
Tenth year: Cang, the heir apparent of the state of Hann, came to Qin as a hostage.

伐取韩石章。
秦兵又攻取了韩国的石章县。
Qin attacked and seized the Hann region of Shizhang,

伐败赵将泥。
打败了赵国的将领泥。
attacked and defeated the Zhao general Ni,

伐取义渠二十五城。
占领了义渠人的二十五座城。
and attacked and seized twenty-five cities of Yiqu.

十一年，樗里疾攻魏焦，降之。
十一年，樗里疾攻打魏国的焦县，迫使焦县降秦。
Eleventh year: Shuli Ji attacked the Wei city of Jiao and forced it to surrender.

败韩岸门，斩首万，其将犀首走。
随后又在岸门打败韩国，斩首一万，韩国的将领犀首逃走。
Qin defeated Hann at Anmen and cut off 10,000 enemy heads; the Hann general, a xishou, fled from the field.

公子通封于蜀。
秦分封公子通于蜀郡。
Tong, a son of the Qin ruler, was enfeoffed in Shu.

燕君让其臣子之。
这年，燕王哙将其君位让给了他的大臣子之。
The ruler of the state of Yan ceded his throne to his minister Zi Zhi.

十二年，王与梁王会临晋。
十二年，秦王与梁王在临晋会见。
Twelfth year: the king of Qin met with the king of Liang at Linjin.

庶长疾攻赵，虏赵将庄。
秦将樗里疾进攻赵国，俘获了赵将庄。
The militia leader Shuli Ji attacked Zhao and captured the Zhao general Zhuang.

张仪相楚。
张仪又为秦国去做了楚国的宰相。
Zhang Yi became prime minister of Chu.

十三年，庶长章击楚于丹阳，虏其将屈勾，斩首八万;
十三年，秦将魏章攻打楚国的丹阳，俘虏了楚将屈勾，斩首八万。
Thirteenth year: the militia leader Zhang attacked the forces of Chu at Danyang, captured the Chu general Qu Gai, and cut off the heads of 80,000 of the enemy.

又攻楚汉中，取地六百里，置汉中郡。
又攻打楚国的汉中，夺取了六百里见方的土地，在此设立了汉中郡。
He also attacked the Chu region of Hanzhong, seized an area of 600 li, and set up the province of Hanzhong.

楚围雍氏,秦使庶长疾助魏而东攻齐,到满助魏攻燕。
楚国包围了韩国的雍氏城，秦派樗里疾助魏东攻齐国，派到满帮助魏国攻打燕国。
When Chu besieged the Hann city of Yongzhi, Qin dispatched the militia leader Shuli Ji to go to the assistance of Hann and proceed east to attack Qi. Qin also ordered Dao Man to assist Wei in attacking in Yan.

十四年，伐楚，取召陵。
十四年，秦军伐楚，攻占了楚国的召陵。
Fourteenth year: Qin attacked Chu and seized Shaoliang,

丹、犁臣,蜀相壮杀蜀侯来降。
丹、犁两个戎国向秦国称臣。蜀相壮杀死了蜀侯前来投降。
and Dan and Li acknowledged fealty to Qin. Zhuang, the prime minister of Shu, killed the marquis of Shu and came to surrender to Qin.

惠王卒，子武王立。
秦惠王去世，他的儿子武王即位。
King Huiwen died and was succeeded by his son, King Wu.

韩、魏、齐、楚、越皆宾从。
韩国、魏国、齐国、楚国、越国都归服于秦国。
Hann, Wei, Qi, Chu, and Zhao all came to Qin as guests to offer their support.

武王元年，与魏惠王会临晋。
秦武王元年，与魏惠王在临晋相会。
In his first year (310 BC) King Wu met with King Hui of Wei at Linjin.

诛蜀相壮。
诛杀了蜀相壮。
He put to death Zhuang, the prime minister of Shu.

张仪、魏章皆东出之魏。
张仪、魏章都离开秦国东出到了魏国。
Zhang Yi and Wei Zhang both left Qin and went east to Wei.

伐义渠、丹、犁。
秦兵又攻讨义渠、丹、犁。
Qin attacked Yiqu, Dan and Li.

二年，初置丞相，樗里疾、甘茂为左右丞相。
二年，秦国开始设置丞相之职，樗里疾和甘茂分任左丞相和右丞相。
Second year: the office of chancellor was set up. Shuli Ji and Gan Mou were appointed chancellor of the right and left respectively.

张仪死于魏。
张仪死在魏国。
Zhang Yi died in Wei.

三年，与韩襄王会临晋外。
三年，秦武王与韩襄王在临晋城外相会。
Third year: King Wu met with King Xiang of Hann outside the city of Linjin.

南公揭卒,樗里疾相韩。
南公揭去世。樗里疾到韩国为相。
Nangong Jie died. Shuli Ji became prime minister of Hann.

武王谓甘茂曰：“寡人欲容车通三川，窥周室，死不恨矣。”
秦武王对甘茂说：“我想要在三川地区打通一条小路乘车到洛阳看看周国，如能实现这一点，即使是死我也不会感到遗憾了。”
King Wu said to Gan Mou, “I want to send my war chariots through the region of the three rivers and call on the Zhou royal house. Then I can die without regret.”

其秋，使甘茂、庶长寿伐宜阳。
于是在这年秋天，遂派甘茂、庶长寿讨伐韩国的宜阳。
That autumn he dispatched Gan Mou and the militia leader Feng to attack Yiyang.

四年，拔宜阳,斩首六万。
四年，攻下宜阳，斩首六万。
Fourth year: they overran Yiyang, cutting off 60,000 enemy heads,

涉河，城武遂。
又北渡黄河，修筑刚被占领的武遂城。
and then crossed the Yellow River and built defensive walls around Wusui.

魏太子来朝。
这时魏国的太子到秦国朝见秦武王。
The heir apparent of Wei came to the Qin court.

武王有力好戏,力士任鄙、乌获、孟说皆至大官。
秦武王力大，好与人角力，身边的几个大力士如任鄙、乌获、孟说等都因此做了大官。
King Wu of Qin was a very powerful man who loved feats of strength. Persons noted for their physical strength such as Ren Bi, Wu Huo, and Meng Yue all rose to high office under him.

王与孟说举鼎，绝膑。
秦武王与孟说在洛阳比赛举鼎时，失手压断了胫骨。
The king joined Meng Yue in a cauldron-lifting contest and broke his knee-cap.

八月，武王死。族孟说。
八月，秦武王去世。为此，秦国诛灭了孟说的全族。
In the eighth month King Wu died and Meng Yue and his family were all put to death.

武王取魏女为后，无子。
秦武王娶魏国的宗室之女为王后，没有子嗣。
King Wu had taken a daughter of the Wei ruling house as his queen, but as she had borne him no sons,

立异母弟，是为昭襄王。
于是武王的异母弟公子则被立为秦王，这就是昭襄王。
his younger brother by a different mother was set up as ruler to succeed him. This was King Zhaoxiang.

昭襄母楚人，姓芈氏，号宣太后。
昭襄王的母亲是楚国人，姓芈氏，号宣太后。
King Zhaoxiang’s mother, a member of the Chu ruling family, bore the surname Mi and the title Queen Dowager Xuan.

武王死时，昭襄王为质于燕，燕人送归，得立。
武王死时，昭襄王在燕国做人质。燕国人将他送回秦国，故被立为秦王。
When King Wu died, King Zhaoxiang was a hostage in the state of Yan, but the men of Yan escorted him back to Qin so he could become ruler.

昭襄王元年，严君疾为相，甘茂出之魏。
昭襄王元年，严君疾任秦国丞相，甘茂离开秦国去到魏国。
In King Zhaoxiang’s first year (306 BC) Shuli Ji or Lord Yan became prime minister. Gan Mou left Qin and went to Wei.

二年，彗星见。
二年，彗星出现。
Second year: a comet appeared.

庶长壮与大臣、诸公子为逆，皆诛，及惠文后皆不得良死。
庶长公子壮和大臣、诸公子谋逆作乱，全部被诛杀，累及惠文后也未得好死。
The militia leader Zhuang joined with the high ministers, marquises, and ducal sons of Qin in carrying out a revolt, but all were put to death. Even including the consort of King Hui, all died unnatural deaths.

悼武王后出归魏。
悼武王的王后被迫离开秦国回到魏国。
The consort of King Wu left Qin and returned to her native state of Wei.

三年，王冠。与楚王会黄棘，与楚上庸。
三年，昭襄王行加冠礼。昭襄王与楚王在黄棘相会，将上庸归还楚国。
King Zhaoxiang third year: the king assumed the cap of manhood. He met with the king of Chu at Huangji, handing over the region of Shangyong to Chu.

四年，取魏蒲阪。彗星见。
四年，攻取了魏国的蒲阪。彗星出现。
Fourth year: Qin seized the city of Puban. A comet appeared.

五年，魏王来朝应亭,复与魏蒲阪。
五年，魏王到应亭朝见秦王，秦王将蒲阪归还给魏国。
Fifth year: the king of Wei came to pay his respects to the Qin court at Yingting, and Qin returned the city Puban to Wei.

六年，蜀侯辉反，司马错定蜀。
六年，蜀侯谋反，司马错平定了蜀国的叛乱。
Sixth year: Hui, the marquis of Shu, revolted. Sima Cuo restored order to Shu.

庶长奂伐楚，斩首二万。
庶长奂攻伐楚国，斩首二万。
The militia leader Huan attacked Chu and cut off 20,000 enemy heads.

泾阳君质于齐。
秦国的泾阳君到齐国充当人质。
The ducal son Shi, Lord Jingyang, was sent to Qi as a hostage.

日食，昼晦。
这年发生日蚀，白天都很昏暗。
There was an eclipse of the sun and it grew dark at midday.

七年，拔新城。
七年，攻下楚国的新城。
Seventh year: Qin captured the city of Xincheng.

樗里子卒。
这年樗里子去世。
Shuli Ji died.

八年，使将军芈戎攻楚，取新市。
八年，秦派将军芈戎攻伐楚国，占领了新市。
King Zhaoxiang eighth year: Qin sent its general Mi Rong to attack Chu and seize Xinshi.

齐使章子，魏使公孙喜，韩使暴鸢共攻楚方城，取唐眛。
齐国派章子、魏国派公孙喜、韩国派暴鸢同时攻打楚国的方城，俘虏了唐眛。
Qi dispatched Zhang Zi, Wei dispatched Gongsun Xi, and Hann dispatched Bao Yuan to make a joint attack on the Chu city of Fangcheng, in which they seized the Chu general Tang Mei.

赵破中山,其君亡，竟死齐。
赵国攻克中山国的都城，中山国君逃到齐国，最后死在齐国。
Zhao destroyed the state of Zhongshan and its ruler fled, eventually dying in Qi.

魏公子劲、韩公子长为诸侯。
魏公子劲、韩公子长被封为诸侯。
The ducal son Jing of Wei and the ducal son Chang of Hann became marquises.

九年，孟尝君薛文来相秦。
九年，齐国的孟尝君薛文到秦国任丞相。
King Zhaoxiang ninth year: Xue Wen, Lord Mengchang, came to Qin to become its prime minister.

奂攻楚，取八城，杀其将景快。
秦庶长奂攻楚，夺取了八座城，并杀死了楚将景快。
Huan attacked Chu and seized eight cities, killing the Chu general Jing Kuai.

十年，楚怀王人朝秦，秦留之。
十年，楚怀王到秦国朝见，被秦国扣留。
Tenth year: King Huai of Chu came to pay his respects at the Qin court, where Qin detained him.

薛文以金受免。楼缓为丞相。
孟尝君薛文因为金受的原因被罢免，秦国改任楼缓为丞相。
Xue Wen resigned the post of prime minister because of Jin Shou and Lou Huan became chancellor.

十一年，齐、韩、魏、赵、宋、中山五国共攻秦，至盐氏而还。
十一年，齐国、韩国、魏国、赵国、宋国、中山五国共同攻打秦国，一直打到盐氏县，才撤军而回。
King Zhaoxiang eleventh year: the five states of Qi, Hann, Wei, Zhao, and Song, along with Zhongshan, joined in an attack on Qin, advancing as far as Yanshi before withdrawing.

秦与韩、魏河北及封陵以和。
秦国将河北以及封陵归还给赵国和魏国以求和。
Qin handed over the regions of Hebei and Fengling to Hann and Wei in order to make peace.

彗星见。
这年，彗星出现。
A comet appeared.

楚怀王走之赵，赵不受，还之秦，即死，归葬。
楚怀王从秦国逃到赵国，赵国不敢接纳；怀王只好又回到秦国，后来就死在了秦国，尸体被运回楚国安葬。
King Huai of Chu escaped and fled to Zhao, but Zhao refused to grant him asylum and sent him back to Qin, where he died. His body was returned to Chu for burial.

十二年，楼缓免，穰侯魏冉为相。
十二年，楼缓被免职，穰侯魏冉做了秦国的丞相。
Twelfth year: Lou Huan resigned and Wei Ran, marquis of Rang, became prime minister.

予楚粟五万石。
这年秦国赠送给楚国粮食五万石。
Qin gave Chu 50,000 piculs of grain.

十三年，向寿伐韩，取武始。
十三年，秦将向寿攻打韩国，夺取了韩国的武始。
Thirteenth year: Xiang Shou attacked Hann and seized Wushi.

左更白起攻新城。
秦左更白起攻打新城。
The zuogeng. Bai Qi attacked Xincheng.

五大夫礼出亡奔魏。
秦国的五大夫吕礼从秦国逃出投奔魏国。
The fifth rank counsellor Lü Li left Qin and fled to the state of Wei.

任鄙为汉中守。
秦将任鄙任汉中郡守。
Ren Bi became governor of Hanzhong Province.

十四年，左更白起攻韩、魏于伊阙，斩首二十四万，虏公孙喜，拔五城。
十四年，秦左更白起在伊阙打败韩、魏联军，斩杀韩、魏将士二十四万，俘虏了公孙喜，攻占了五座城。
Fourteenth year: the zuogeng. Bai Qi attacked the Hann and Wei forces at Yique, cutting off 240,000 enemy heads, taking Gongsun Xi prisoner, and capturing five cities.

十五年，大良造白起攻魏，取垣，复予之。攻楚，取宛。
十五年，大良造白起攻打魏国，夺取了垣县。不久秦又将垣县归还给魏国。秦又攻打楚国，占领了宛县。
King Zhaoxiang fifteenth year: the daliangzao. Bai Qi attacked Wei and seized Yuan, but then returned it. He attacked Chu and seized Wan.

十六年，左更错取轵及邓。冉免。封公子市宛，公子悝邓，魏冉陶，为诸侯。
十六年，秦左更司马错攻占了魏国的轵、邓二县。这年魏冉免相。秦封昭王之弟公子市于宛，封公子悝于邓，封昭王舅魏冉于陶，三人都为诸侯。
Sixteenth year: Sima Cuo seized Zhi and Deng. Wei Ran resigned the post of prime minister. Qin enfeoffed the ducal son Shi in Wan, the ducal son Kui in Deng, and Wei Ran in Tao, making them all marquises.

十七年，城阳君入朝，及东周君来朝。秦以垣易蒲阪、皮氏。王之宜阳。
十七年，韩国的城阳君到秦国朝见，东周君也到秦国朝见。秦国用垣县换取了魏国的蒲阪、皮氏。秦王前往宜阳。
Seventeenth year: Lord Chengyang came to the Qin court to pay respects, and the Eastern Zhou ruler also came to court. Qin exchanged the city of Yuan for Puban and Pishi. The king of Qin went to Yiyang.

十八年，错攻垣、河雍，决桥取之。
十八年，司马错攻打垣、河雍，拆断河桥，攻下了垣与河雍二地。
Eighteenth year: Sima Cuo attacked Yuan, Heyong, and Jueqiao and seized them.

十九年，王为西帝，齐为东帝，皆复去之。吕礼来自归。齐破宋，宋王在魏，死温。任鄙卒。
十九年，秦王称西帝，齐王称东帝，不久又都去掉帝号。吕礼从齐国回到秦国。这年齐国攻破宋国，宋王死在魏国的温县。秦国的任鄙去世。
King Zhaoxiang nineteenth year (288 BC): the king of Qin became Western Emperor and the ruler of Qi became Eastern Emperor. Both rulers then abandoned the titles. The fifth rank counsellor Lü Li returned to Qin. Qi destroyed the state of Song and the king of Song took up residence in Wei. He died at Wen. Ren Bi died.

二十年，王之汉中，又之上郡、北河。
二十年，秦昭襄王去往汉中，又去往上郡、北河巡游。
Twentieth year: the king of Qin visited Hanzhong. He also visited Shangjun and the northern bend of the Yellow River.

二十一年，错攻魏河内。魏献安邑，秦出其人，募徙河东赐爵，赦罪人迁之。泾阳君封宛。
二十一年，秦将司马错攻打魏国的河内。魏国将安邑献给秦国，秦将安邑的居民驱出。秦用赐予爵位的办法招募民众迁往河东，又赦免罪犯迁往安邑。将宛县分封给昭王之弟泾阳君。
King Zhaoxiang twenty-first year: Sima Cuo attacked the Henei area of Wei. Wei presented the city of Anyi to Qin. Qin expelled the inhabitants and moved its own people to the area east of the Yellow River, bestowing noble ranks and pardoning criminals in order to facilitate the move. The ducal son Shi, Lord Jingyang, was enfeoffed in Wan.

魏冉免相。
魏冉被免相。
Wei Ran resigned as prime minister.

二十五年，拔赵二城。
二十五年，秦军攻占赵国的两个城。
King Zhaoxiang twenty-fifth year: Qin captured two of Zhao’s cities.

与韩王会新城，与魏王会新明邑。
秦王与韩王在新城相会。与魏王在新明邑相会。
The Qin ruler met with the king of Hann at Xincheng, and with the king of Wei at Xinming city.

二十六年，赦罪人迁之穰。
二十六年，秦国赦免了一批罪犯，将他们迁往穰地。
Twenty-sixth year: Qin pardoned criminals and moved them to the region of Rang.

侯冉复相。
穰侯再次担任秦国丞相。
Wei Ran resumed the post of prime minister.

二十七年，错攻楚。
二十七年，司马错攻打楚国。
Twenty-seventh year: Sima Cuo attacked Chu.

赦罪人迁之南阳。
秦国赦免罪犯，将其迁往南阳。
Qin pardoned criminals and moved them to the region of Nanyang.

白起攻赵，取光狼城。
秦将白起攻打赵国，占领了光狼城。
Bai Qi attacked Zhao and seized the city of Guanglang in Dai.

又使司马错发陇西，因蜀攻楚黔中，拔之。
秦国又派司马错征调陇西地区的丁勇，经由蜀郡攻打并占领了楚国的黔中郡。
Qin also sent Sima Cuo to set out with troops from Longxi and, proceeding through Shu, to attack Qianzhong, which he overran.

二十八年，大良造白起攻楚，取鄢、邓,赦罪人迁之。
二十八年，大良造白起攻打楚国，占领了楚国的鄢、邓，秦国赦免罪犯迁往鄢、邓居住。
Twenty-eighth year: the daliangzao Bai Qi attacked Chu and seized Yan and Deng. Criminals were pardoned and transported to those areas.

二十九年，大良造白起攻楚，取郢为南郡，楚王走。
二十九年，大良造白起攻打楚国，攻下了楚国的郢都，将其设为南郡，楚王向东逃到陈。
Twenty-ninth year: the daliangzao Bai Qi attacked Chu and seized the Chu capital of Ying, which was made into Nan Province. The Chu king fled.

周君来。
周国的国君到秦国朝拜。
The Zhou ruler came to Qin.

王与楚王会襄陵。
秦王与楚王在襄陵会见。
The king of Qin met with the king of Chu at Xiangling.

白起为武安君。
白起被封为武安君。
Bai Qi was made Lord Wuan.

三十年，蜀守若伐楚，取巫郡，及江南为黔中郡。
三十年，秦国的蜀郡守张若伐楚，占领了巫郡和江南，在其地设立黔中郡。
King Zhaoxiang thirtieth year (277 BC): Ruo, the governor of Shu, attacked Chu and seized Wujun and Jiangnan, which were made into Qianzhong Province.

三十一年，白起伐魏，取两城。
三十一年，白起攻伐魏国，夺取两城。
Thirty-first year: Bai Qi attacked Wei and seized two cities.

楚人反我江南。
楚国人在被秦国占领的江南地区反叛秦国。
The people of Chu revolted in Qin’s region of Jiangnan.

三十二年，相穰侯攻魏，至大梁，破暴鸢，斩首四万，鸢走，魏入三县请和。
三十二年，秦国丞相穰侯率军攻打魏国，到达魏都大梁，打败了暴鸢，斩杀魏军四万人，暴鸢逃走，魏国被迫向秦国割让三个县求和。
Thirty-second year: the prime minister Wei Ran (Marquis of Rang) attacked Wei, advancing as far as Daliang. He defeated Bao Yuan’s forces, beheading 40,000 men; Bao Yuan fled. Wei offered three districts to Qin to sue for peace.

三十三年，客卿胡阳攻魏卷、蔡阳、长社，取之。
三十三年，秦将客卿胡阳攻打魏国的卷县、蔡阳、长社，占领了这三个县。
Thirty-third year: Hu Yang, a guest minister of Qin, attacked Juan, Caiyang, and Changshe in Wei and seized them.

击芒卯华阳，破之，斩首十五万。
秦国在华阳击败了魏将芒卯，斩首十五万。
He attacked Mang Mao at Huayang, defeated him, and beheaded 150,000 men.

魏入南阳以和。
魏国又将南阳之地割让给秦国求和。
Wei offered Nanyang to Qin to sue for peace.

三十四年，秦与魏、韩上庸地为一郡，南阳免臣迁居之。
三十四年，秦国把所占领的韩、魏的南阳与楚国的上庸一带合并为一郡，赦免南阳地区的罪臣迁往那里居住。
Thirty-fourth year: Qin merged the captured Nanyang regions of Wei, Hann and Shangyong of Chu into one commandery, and relocated pardoned offenders from Nanyang there.

三十五年，佐韩、魏、楚伐燕。初置南阳郡。
三十五年，秦国帮着韩、魏、楚攻打燕国。开始在南阳设郡。
Thirty-fifth year: Qin assisted Hann, Wei, and Chu in attacking Yan. The Nanyang Commandery was formally established.

三十六年，客卿灶攻齐，取刚、寿,予穰侯。
三十六年，秦客卿灶攻打齐国，占领了刚、寿二邑，秦将二邑分封给了穰侯。
Thirty-sixth year: Zao, a guest minister of Qin, attacked Qi, seized Gang and Shou, and presented them to the Marquis of Rang.

三十八年，中更胡阳攻赵阏与，不能取。
三十八年，秦国的中更胡阳攻打赵国的阏与，没有攻下。
Thirty-eighth year: Hu Yang, holding the rank of Zhonggeng, attacked Eyu in Zhao but failed to seize it.

四十年，悼太子死魏，归葬芷阳。
四十年，秦昭王的悼太子死在魏国，运回秦国埋葬在芷阳。
Fortieth year: Crown Prince Dao died in Wei; his body was brought back to Qin and buried in Zhiyang.

四十一年夏，攻魏，取邢丘、怀。
四十一年夏天，攻打魏国，占领了邢丘、怀邑。
Forty-first year (summer): attacked Wei and seized Xingqiu and Huai.

四十二年，安国君为太子。
四十二年，立安国君为太子。
Forty-second year: Prince Anguo was made crown prince.

十月，宣太后薨，葬芷阳郦山。
十月，宣太后去世，葬于芷阳的郦山。
October: Queen Dowager Xuan passed away and was buried at Lishan in Zhiyang.

九月，穰侯出之陶。
九月，穰侯离开都城回到他的封地陶县。
September: the Marquis of Rang departed for his fief in Tao.

四十三年，武安君白起攻韩，拔九城,斩首五万。
四十三年，武安君白起攻打韩国，攻占了九座城，斩首五万。
Forty-third year: Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, attacked Hann, captured nine cities, and beheaded 50,000 men.

四十四年，攻韩南阳，取之。
四十四年，攻打韩国的南阳，将其占领。
Forty-fourth year: attacked Nanyang in Hann and seized it.

四十五年，五大夫贲攻韩，取十城。
四十五年，秦国的五大夫贲攻打韩国，占领了十座城。
Forty-fifth year: Ben, holding the rank of Wudaifu, attacked Hann and seized ten cities.

叶阳君悝出之国，未至而死。
叶阳君公子悝离开都城咸阳到自己的封国去，没有到达就死了。
Prince Kui, Lord Yeyang, left for his fief but died before arriving.

四十七年，秦攻韩上党，上党降赵,秦因攻赵，赵发兵击秦，相距。
四十七年，秦国攻打韩国的上党，上党投降赵国，于是秦兵转攻赵国。赵国派兵迎击，两军相持不下。
King Zhaoxiang forty-seventh year (260 BC): Qin attacked Hann’s region of Shangdang, which surrendered to the state of Zhao. Qin then launched an attack on Zhao. Zhao dispatched troops to meet the attack, and for a time they were stalemated.

秦使武安君白起击，大破赵于长平，四十余万尽杀之。
秦国又派武安君白起攻赵，在长平大破赵军。赵军的四十多万人全部被坑杀。
Qin then dispatched Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, to press the attack, and he inflicted a crushing defeat on Zhao at Changping, killing the entire force of over 400,000 men.

四十八年十月，韩献垣雍。
四十八年，十月，韩国将垣、雍二县献给秦国。
Forty-eighth year: Hann presented the city of Yuanyong to Qin.

秦军分为三军。武安君归。
秦国的军队分成两支，武安君回国。
The Qin army was divided into three parts. Bai Qi returned to Qin.

王龁将伐赵武安、皮牢,拔之。
王龁率兵攻打赵国的武安、皮牢，将其占领。
Wang He led the forces of Qin in an attack on Zhao’s cities of Wuan and Pilao and captured them.

司马梗北定太原,尽有韩上党。
司马梗率兵北进平定太原，秦国全部占领了韩国的上党郡。
Sima Geng proceeded north to take control of Taiyuan, gaining possession of all of Hann’s region of Shangdang.

正月，兵罢，复守上党。
正月，秦军撤回，重新在上党集结。
（注：英文原文此处未单独对应此句，承接后续内容）

其十月，五大夫陵攻赵邯郸。
当年的十月，秦派五大夫王陵围攻赵国的邯郸。
In the tenth month the fifth rank counsellor Ling attacked Zhao’s city of Handan.

四十九年正月,益发卒佐陵。
四十九年正月，秦派兵增援王陵。
Forty-ninth year: in the first month Qin dispatched more troops to assist Ling.

陵战不善，免，王龁代将。
王陵的战绩不佳被免职，王龁代替王陵统领军队。
but Ling was unsuccessful in battle and was relieved of his command, Wang He replacing him as commander.

其十月，将军张唐攻魏，为蔡尉捐弗守，还斩之。
当年的十月，秦将张唐率军攻魏，魏国的守将蔡尉放弃阵地逃回，被魏王所杀。
In the tenth month the Qin general Zhang Tang attacked Wei, but his commander Cai abandoned his post and failed to stick by it; on return to Qin he was executed.

五十年十月，武安君白起有罪，为士伍，迁阴密。
五十年十月，武安君白起犯罪，被贬为士伍，迁往阴密。
King Zhaoxiang fiftieth year (257 BC): in the tenth month Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, was accused of a crime, reduced to the rank of common soldier, and exiled to Yinmi.

张唐攻邺，拔之。
秦将张唐攻邺，将其占领。
Zhang Tang attacked Zheng and captured it.（注：英文原文“Zheng”应为“Ye”（邺），此处保留用户提供的英文原文）

十二月，益发卒军汾城旁。
十二月，秦国增派军队驻扎在汾城旁。
In the twelfth month more troops were sent to reinforce the army outside the city of Fencheng.

武安君白起有罪，死。
武安君白起有罪，发配途中被迫自杀。
Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, was accused of further crimes and put to death.

龁攻邯郸，不拔，去，还奔汾军。
王龁攻打邯郸，久攻不下，于是撤军，往归驻扎在汾城旁的军队。
Wang He attacked Handan but failed to capture it. He withdrew and fled with his troops to the army at Fencheng.

二月余，攻晋军，斩首六千，晋、楚流死河二万人。
王龁军在汾城休整了两个多月，前往迎击救赵的魏军，斩首六千，魏、楚两国救赵的士兵被赶入黄河淹死的多达两万人。
Two or more months later he attacked the Wei army, cutting off 60,000 enemy heads. The bodies of 20,000 men of Wei and Chu washed down the Yellow River.

攻汾城。
王龁转攻汾城。
Wang He attacked Fencheng.

即从唐拔宁新中，宁新中更名安阳。
攻克后又随张唐攻下了宁新中，于是将宁新中改名为安阳。
and then joined Zhang Tang in capturing Ningxinzhong. Ningxinzhong was renamed Anyang.

初作河桥。
并首次在安阳的黄河上架桥。
For the first time a bridge was built across the Yellow River.

五十一年，将军掺攻韩，取阳城、负黍，斩首四万。攻赵，取二十余县，首虏九万。西周君背秦，与诸侯约从，将天下锐兵出伊阙攻秦，令秦毋得通阳城。于是秦使将军掺攻西周。西周君走来自归，顿首受罪，尽献其邑三十六城，口三万。秦王受献，归其君于周。
五十一年，秦将掺率兵攻韩，攻占了韩国的阳城、负黍，斩首四万；转而攻赵，又夺取了二十多个县，斩首及俘获的赵军有九万人。西周君背叛秦国，与诸侯联合，率领天下的精锐部队出伊阙截断了秦国的东西交通，使秦国不能由函谷关通往阳城。于是秦国派将军掺攻打西周。西周君逃走，后自行到秦国叩头认罪，并把西周三十六邑的领土与人口三万献给秦国。秦王接受了西周君的贡献后，放西周君回到王城。
King Zhaoxiang fifty-first year (256 BC): the Qin general Jiu attacked Hann, seized Yangcheng and Fumai, and cut off 40,000 enemy heads. He attacked Zhao and seized twenty or more districts, beheading or capturing 90,000 of the enemy. The Western Zhou ruler revolted against Qin and, entering into alliance with the other feudal rulers, led a force of crack troops drawn from all over the empire out of Yique in an attack on Qin, preventing Qin from maintaining contact with Yangcheng. Qin thereupon dispatched its general Jiu to attack Western Zhou. The Western Zhou ruler hastened to Qin to acknowledge his submission, bowing his head in recognition of guilt and offering his entire territory of thirty-six cities and 30,000 inhabitants to Qin. The Qin king accepted the gift and sent the Zhou ruler back to his capital in Zhou.

五十二年，周民东亡，其器九鼎入秦。周初亡。
五十二年，西周的民众纷纷向东周逃亡，象征周朝权力的宝器九鼎被运到了秦国，周王朝已经初步算是灭亡了。
Fifty-second year: the Zhou people fled to the east and their sacred vessels, including the nine cauldrons, passed into the hands of Qin. Thus the Zhou dynasty came to an end.

五十三年，天下来宾。魏后，秦使掺伐魏，取吴城。韩王入朝，魏委国听令。五十四年，王郊见上帝于雍。五十六年秋，昭襄王卒，子孝文王立。尊唐八子为唐太后，而合其葬于先王。韩王衰绖入吊祠，诸侯皆使其将相来吊祠，视丧事。
五十三年，天下诸侯都来归顺秦国，魏国来得最晚，于是秦国派将军掺攻打魏国，占领了吴城。韩王到秦国朝见秦王。魏国将国政交给秦国，一切听命于秦。五十四年，秦王在雍县的南郊举行祭祀上帝的典礼。五十六年秋天，秦昭襄王去世，他的儿子孝文王即位。孝文王尊奉唐八子为唐太后，将她与昭襄王合葬。韩王身穿孝服入秦吊祭；其他诸侯也都派遣将相前来吊唁，参加丧事活动。
Fifty-third year: the various rulers of the empire came to Qin as guests, but the ruler of Wei was the last to do so. Qin dispatched Jiu to attack Wei, seizing Wucheng. When the king of Hann came to the Qin court, the state of Wei turned over its internal affairs to the direction of Qin. Fifty-fourth year: the king of Qin carried out the suburban sacrifice to the Lord on High at Yong. Fifty-sixth year: in the autumn King Zhaoxiang died and was succeeded by his son, King Xiaowen. King Xiaowen honoured his deceased mother Tang Bazi with the title Queen Dowager Tang and had her body interred with that of the former king. The king of Hann donned mourning garments and came to Qin to offer condolences and sacrifice. The other feudal rulers all sent their prime ministers to Qin to offer condolences and sacrifice and to be present at the burial ceremony.

孝文王元年，赦罪人，修先王功臣，褒厚亲戚，弛苑囿。孝文王除丧，十月己亥即位，三日辛丑卒，子庄襄王立。
秦孝文王元年，赦免罪人，追封先王的功臣，厚待骨肉亲戚，开放王家苑囿，让百姓入内采伐耕种。孝文王服丧一年期满，十月初四正式处理政事，仅三天，到十月初六就去世了，他的儿子庄襄王即位。
King Xiaowen first year (250 BC): criminals were pardoned, meritorious ministers of the former ruler were treated with generosity, and prohibitions on the use of parklands were relaxed. His mourning duties completed, King Xiaowen ascended the throne on the day jihai of the tenth month. Three days later, on the day xinchou, he died. He was succeeded by his son, King Zhuangxiang.

庄襄王元年,大赦罪人，修先王功臣，施德厚骨肉而布惠于民。
庄襄王元年，大量赦免罪犯，封赏先王功臣，对亲戚族人大加赏赐，对黎民百姓广施恩惠。
King Zhuangxiang first year (250 BC): many criminals were pardoned. meritorious ministers of the former ruler were honoured, generous awards were handed out to the ruler’s kin, and the people were treated with kindness.

东周君与诸侯谋秦,秦使相国吕不韦诛之,尽入其国。
这时东周君又联合各国诸侯谋划攻秦，秦派相国吕不韦讨伐东周君，将东周的国土全部并入秦国的版图。
The Eastern Zhou ruler plotted with the other feudal lords to attack Qin, but the Qin prime minister Lü Buwei had him put to death and confiscated all his lands.

秦不绝其祀，以阳人地赐周君,奉其祭祀。
为了不使周王朝先祖的祭祀就此断绝，秦国将阳人聚这片小地方赏赐给东周君，让他住在这里继续祭祀周朝的祖先。
Qin did not cut off the Zhou sacrifices, however, but bestowed the region of Yangren on the Zhou ruler so that he could carry on the sacrifices to his ancestor.

使蒙骜伐韩，韩献成皋、巩。
接着秦国派蒙骜攻打韩国，韩国遂将成皋、巩县献给秦国。
Qin ordered Meng Ao to attack Hann; Hann handed over the regions of Chenggao and Gong.

秦界至大梁，初置三川郡。
秦国的国界遂向东扩展到魏国都城大梁的城下，秦国在韩国的旧有地面上设置了三川郡。
Thus Qin’s eastern boundary extended as far as Daliang and it set up the province of Sanchuan or Three Rivers.

二年，使蒙骜攻赵，定太原。
二年，秦王派蒙骜攻打赵国，占有了赵国的太原郡。
Second year: Qin ordered Meng Ao to attack Zhao and bring Taiyuan under control.

三月，蒙骜攻魏高都、汲,拔之。攻赵榆次、新城、狼孟,取三十七城。
三月，蒙骜攻打魏国的高都和汲县，将其占领；又攻打赵国的榆次、新城、狼孟，占领了赵国的三十七座城。
Third year: Meng Ao attacked the Wei cities of Gaodu and Ji and captured them. He also attacked the Zhao cities of Yuci, Xincheng, and Langmeng, seizing thirty-seven cities.

四月日食。
四月，发生日蚀。
In the fourth month there was an eclipse of the sun.

三年，王龁攻上党。初置太原郡。
三年，王龁彻底扫平上党，设置太原郡。
King Zhuangxiang fourth year (247 BC): Wang He attacked Shangdang and the province of Taiyuan was set up.

魏将无忌率五国兵击秦，秦却于河外。蒙骜败，解而去。
这时魏国的将军无忌又率领燕、韩、赵、魏、楚五国的军队攻打秦国，秦国退到黄河以南。蒙骜兵败，东方的诸侯军撤退而去。
The Wei general Wuji led the forces of five feudal states in an attack on Qin and Qin was forced to withdraw beyond the Yellow River. Meng Ao suffered defeat and his forces scattered and fled.

五月丙午，庄襄王卒，子政立,是为秦始皇帝。
五月二十六日，庄襄王去世，他的儿子即位，这就是秦始皇。
In the fifth month, the day bingwu, King Zhuangxiang died and was succeeded by his son, Zheng, who became the First Emperor of the Qin.

秦王政立二十六年，初并天下为三十六郡,号为始皇帝。
秦王赢政即位的第二十六年，第一次统一了天下，将全国分设为三十六郡。嬴政号称秦始皇。
In the twenty-sixth year of his rule (221 BC), King Zheng unified the empire, set up thirty-six provinces, and took the title Shihuangdi or First Emperor of the Qin dynasty.

始皇帝五十一年而崩,子胡亥立，是为二世皇帝。
秦始皇五十一岁驾崩，他的儿子胡亥被立为皇帝，就是秦二世。
He died in the fifty-first year of his rule (210 BC) and was succeeded by his son Huhai, who is known as the Second Emperor.

三年，诸侯并起叛秦,赵高杀二世，立子婴。
秦二世三年，当各地诸侯蜂拥而起即将推翻秦国时，赵高杀了秦二世，改立子婴为秦王。
In the third year of his rule (207 BC) the feudal lords all rose in revolt against the Qin. Zhao Gao put to death the Second Emperor and set up Ziying.

子婴立月余，诸侯诛之,遂灭秦。
子婴为秦王只一个多月，被项羽所杀，秦朝遂告灭亡。
After Ziying had been ruler for a little over a month, the feudal lords executed him and thus wiped out the Qin dynasty.

其语在《秦始皇本纪》中。
事情见《秦始皇本纪》。
A discussion will be found in “The Basic Annals of the First Emperor”.

太史公曰：秦之先为嬴姓。
太史公说：秦的祖先姓赢。
The Grand Historian remarks: Qin’s ancestors belonged to the Ying family,

其后分封，以国为姓,有徐氏、郯氏、莒氏、终黎氏、运奄氏、菟裘氏、将梁氏、黄氏、江氏、修鱼氏、白冥氏、蜚廉氏、秦氏。
他的后代子孙被分封到各地，各自以封国为姓，有徐氏、郯氏、莒氏、终黎氏、运奄氏、菟裘氏、将梁氏、黄氏、江氏、修鱼氏、白冥氏、蜚廉氏、秦氏。
but later they were enfeoffed in various regions and took the names of their respective fiefs as their surname. Hence there was the Xu family, the Tan family, the Ju family, the Zhongli family, the Yunyan family, the Tuqiu family, the Jiangliang family, the Huang family, the Jiang family, the Xiuyu family, the Baiming family, the Feilian family, and the Qin family.

然秦以其先造父封赵城，为赵氏。
但因为其中有位祖先造父被封在赵城，所以秦（王室）姓赵。
But because the ancestor of the Qin family, Zaofu, had been enfeoffed in the city of Zhao, the last became known as the Zhao family.