太史公读列封至便侯曰：有以也夫！
太史公读有关列侯分封的资料，读到便侯时说到：所有的事情都是有原因的！
When, as Grand Historian, I have occasion to read over the records of enfeoffment and come to the case of Wu Chien, the marquis of Pien, I say to myself, "Yes, there was good reason for this!"

长沙王者，着令甲，称其忠焉。
长沙王被封为诸侯王，记录在法令的第一篇中，他的忠诚受到了赞扬。
His father Wu Jui was enfeoffed as king of Ch'ang-sha by special order of the government in recognition of his loyalty to Emperor Kao-tsu.

昔高祖定天下，功臣非同姓疆土而王者八国。
当初高祖平定天下，功臣之中不是皇室同姓宗亲而裂土受封的诸侯王有八个。
In the early days of the dynasty, when Kao-tsu first brought order to the world, he marked out a number of domains and enfeoffed eight of his distinguished followers who were not members of his own clan as kings of these states.

至孝惠帝时，唯独长沙全，禅五世，以无嗣绝，竟无过，为籓守职，信矣。
到孝惠帝时，只剩下长沙王保全了他的封国，接连传承五世，最后因为没有后嗣才绝封，自始自终都没有犯什么过错，作为朝廷的藩守，尽职尽责，事情果真如此。
But by the reign of Emperor Hui only, one of these, the domain of Ch'ang-sha, had passed down safely through five generations of the Wu family, though eventually it was abolished because of the lack of an heir. Wu Jui and his successors remained to the end free from all error, fulfilling their duty as protectors of the imperial house, a model of fidelity.

故其泽流枝庶，毋功而侯者数人。
所以他的德业能使旁系子孙都能享受到恩惠，没有创建功勋而受封为侯的就有数人。
It was for this reason that Wu Jui was able to pass on his blessings to his descendants so that a number of them, though distinguished by no particular merit themselves, were able to become marquises.

及孝惠讫孝景间五十载，追修高祖时遗功臣，及从代来，吴楚之劳，诸侯子若肺腑，外国归义，封者九十有余。
从孝惠帝之初到孝景帝之末，期间五十多年，追录高祖时遗漏未封的功臣，以及追随孝文帝从代国入继大统的旧臣，孝景帝时期在平定吴楚七国之乱的战事中立下了显著功劳的将相官员，身为皇室骨肉至亲的诸侯子弟，前来投顺的外邦异族的首领等等，先后受封为侯的有九十多人。
During the fifty years from the reign of Emperor Hui to that of Emperor Ching, over ninety fiefs were granted, some as belated rewards to followers who had distinguished themselves in the time of Kao-tsu, some to the ministers who accompanied Emperor Wen from his kingdom in Tai, some to those who achieved merit during the uprising of the states of Wu and Ch'u, some to the sons of marquises or to men related to the imperial family by marriage, and some to men who came from foreign countries and acknowledged fealty to the Han.

咸表始终，当世仁义成功之著者也。
现在把他们受封传承的情况列表记载如下，这些都是当代有仁义、建大功的人物中比较突出的。
In the following table I have set forth a complete list of these from beginning to end, a record of the men who distinguished themselves during this age by their virtue and accomplishment.