陈思王植字子建。
陈思王曹植字子建。
Cao Zhi, Prince Si of Chen, also known as Zijian.

年十余岁,诵读《诗》《论》及辞赋数十万言,善属文。
十几岁就诵读《诗经》《论语》以及辞赋几十万字,擅长作文。
could recite The Book of Poetry, The Analects, narrative poems and rhapsodies of over several hundred thousand words around the age of ten, and he was also talented in writing essays.

太祖尝视其文,谓植日:"汝倩人邪?"
曹操有一次看到他的文章,对他说:"你请人代笔的么?"
Grand Ancestor once read his essay and asked him," Have you asked someone to write this for you?"

植跪日:"言出为论,下笔成章,顾当面试,奈何倩人?"
曹植跪下说:"出口成论,下笔成章,尽管当面考试,怎么会请人代作呢?"
Cao Zhi knelt down and answered,"Out of my mouth are spoken the dialogues, and out of my hand with my brush are written down the essays. You can test me right now face to face, for how could I ask others to do it?"

时邺铜爵台新成,太祖悉将诸子登台,使各为赋。
当时邺城铜爵台刚刚建成,曹操带领所有儿子登台,让他们各自作赋。
Right at that moment, the Bronze Bird Terrace had been newly completed in Ye, and Grand Ancestor asked all his sons to ascend the terrace, and each write a rhapsody.

植援笔立成,可观,太祖甚异之。
曹植拿起笔来立刻就写成了,文辞很是可观,曹操感到十分惊奇。
Cao Zhi took up the brush and quickly finished the task. His composition was quite excellent, and Grand Ancestor marveled at it.

性简易,不治威仪。
曹植性情平易随和,不喜欢摆出威严的气派。
Cao Zhi was simple and easy-going in temperament. He did not assume imposing or over-dignified manners.

舆马服饰,不尚华丽。
车马服饰,都不追求华丽。
and did not seek pompously ornate carriages, horses, or clothes either.

每进见难问,应声而对,特见宠爱。
每次见曹操答问辩难,总能应声作答,特别受曹操宠爱。
Each time he was received in audience by Grand Ancestor, who asked questions and demanded for answers, he always gave immediate responses, and because of this he was especially doted on.

建安十六年,封平原侯。
建安十六年,被封为平原侯。
In the sixteenth year of the Jian'an Period, he was conferred on Marquis of Pingyuan.

十九年,徒封临苗侯。
建安十九年,改封临菑侯。
In the nineteenth year, he was transferred to be Marquis of Linzi.

太祖征孙权,使植留守邺,戒之日:"吾昔为顿邱令,年二十三。
曹操征讨孙权,让曹植留守邺城,告诫他说:"我从前任顿丘县令时,才二十三岁。
Grand Ancestor was going on a punitive expedition against Sun Quan, so he left Cao Zhi to guard the capital. He warned him,"I became the magistrate of Dunqiu at the age of twenty-three.

思此时所行,无悔于今。
想起那时候所干的事,到今天也没有什么可后悔的。
When I think about what I did at that time, I have nothing to regret even today.

今汝年亦二十三矣,可不勉与!"
现在你也二十三岁了,能不努力吗!"
Now you are twenty-three, should you not exert yourself?"

植既以才见异,而丁仪、丁廙、杨脩等为之羽翼。
曹植既因为有才而特别受宠,又有丁仪、丁廙、杨脩等人作为他的左膀右臂。
Cao Zhi received special favor for his talent. In addition, he had his close friends Ding Yi (仪), Ding Yi (廙) and Yang Xiu at his assistance.

太祖狐疑,几为太子者数矣。
曹操有些犹疑,好几次几乎要立曹植为太子。
Grand Ancestor was skeptical about them as his companions, and several times, he considered appointing Cao Zhi as his heir.

而植任性而行,不自雕励,饮酒不节。
可是曹植行事任性,不注意修饰约束自己,饮酒无节制。
Nevertheless, being obstinate in his conduct, Cao Zhi did not behave in restrained manners, and often drank out of self-control.

文帝御之以术,矫情自饰,宫人左右,并为之说,故遂定为嗣。
曹丕则玩弄手段,掩饰真情以粉饰自己,因此连曹操身边的宫人与内官,也都随时替曹丕说话,所以终于策立曹丕为太子。
Emperor Wen (Cao Pi) handled the situations with tact, and presented himself with proper manners, and as a result even the people around Grand Ancestor spoke in favour of Cao Pi. Consequently, Cao Pi was appointed heir-apparent.

二十二年,增植邑五千,并前万户。
建安二十二年,增加曹植食邑五千户,连同以前的共一万户。
In the twenty-second year, Cao Zhi received an additional five thousand households which, in addition to what he already possessed, totaled a hundred thousand households as his emoluments.

植尝乘车行驰道中,开司马门出。
曹植有一次驾车在御街上行驶,打开司马门出宫。
Cao Zhi once had his carriage driven in the middle of the palace thoroughfare, opened the Sima Gate (Front Palace Gate) and went out through it.

太祖大怒,公车令坐死。
曹操大怒,负责管理官车的公车令因此被判有罪处死。
Grand Ancestor flew into a rage upon hearing of it, and sentenced the official-carriage captain to death.

由是重诸侯科禁,而植宠日衰。
从那以后强化约束诸侯的法令,而曹操对曹植的宠爱也日渐衰减。
Thereafter, strict restrictions on the vassals were imposed, and Cao Zhi's favor from Grand Ancestor was gradually weakened.

太祖既虑终始之变,以杨脩颇有才策,而又袁氏之甥也,于是以罪诛脩。
曹操担心曹植的势力太大会成为后患,因为杨修很有才华和谋略,又是袁术的外甥,于是罗织罪名杀了杨修。
Grand Ancestor worried about the possible troubles in the future because of the growing strength of Cao Zhi and, because of this fear, he killed Yang Xiu on the claim that his crimes were due to his talent and that he was a nephew of Yuan Shu.

植益内不自安。
曹植心里更加不安。
Cao Zhi felt even more uneasy.

二十四年,曹仁为关羽所围。
建安二十四年,曹仁被关羽围困。
In the twenty-fourth year,曹仁 was encircled by Guan Yu.

太祖以植为南中郎将,行征虏将军,欲遣救仁,呼有所敕戒,植醉不能受命,于是悔而罢之。
曹操任命曹植为南中郎将,代行征虏将军,准备派他去救曹仁,召他来要告诫他一番话,曹植喝醉了酒不能接受指令,曹操大为后悔,罢免了他的军事职务。
Grand Ancestor appointed Cao Zhi as south-expedition general and acting enemy-conquering general, intending to send him to rescue Cao Ren. Grand Ancestor then summoned him for admonishment. It so happened that at the moment Cao Zhi was drunk, and could not accept the order. Grand Ancestor greatly regretted his decision to promote him and stripped him of his military powers.

文帝即王位,诛丁仪、丁廙并其男口。
曹丕即王位,诛杀丁仪、丁廙和他们家里所有的男子。
After Emperor Wen ascended the throne, he killed Ding Yi (仪), Ding Yi (廙) and all the males in their clan.

植与诸侯并就国。
曹植和诸侯全都回到各自封国。
Cao Zhi and other vassals went to live in their own enfeoffed states.

黄初二年,监国谒者灌均希指,奏"植醉酒悖慢,劫胁使者"。
黄初二年,监国谒者灌均迎合曹丕的旨意,奏"曹植醉酒之后行为悖逆荒唐,劫持威胁使者"。
In the second year of the Huangchu Period, Guan Jun, a vassal state supervisor and imperial messenger, reported to Cao Pi about Cao Zhi, who "behaved absurdly, kidnapping and threatening the imperial envoy when drunk."

有司请治罪,帝以太后故,贬爵安乡侯。
有关官员请求治曹植的罪,曹丕因为太后的缘故,将他贬为安乡侯。
The relevant officials demanded punishment of his crime; however, the emperor only demoted him as Marquis of Anxiang on account of the dowager's opposition.

其年改封鄄城侯。
同年又改封为鄄城侯。
and that year again he was changed to Marquis of Juancheng.

三年,立为鄄城王,邑二千五百户。
黄初三年,立曹植为鄄城王,食邑二千五百户。
In the third year, he was conferred as Prince of Juancheng, thus possessing two thousand and five hundred households.

四年,徒封雍丘王。
黄初四年,改封曹植为雍丘王。
In the fourth year, he was moved and given the title of Prince of Yongqiu.

其年,朝京都。
当年,曹植进京朝见。
That year, he was allowed to visit the capital.

上疏日:"臣自抱衅归藩,刻肌刻骨,追思罪戾,昼分而食,夜分而寝。
上疏说:"臣自从负罪回到藩国,深切入骨地反思所犯的罪过,寝食难安。
and he wrote a memorial to the emperor:" Ever since I returned to my enfeoffed state with the crimes I committed, I have meditated on them in great depth. I feel uneasy about the fact that the imperial laws could not be violated twice, hence the imperial favors would be difficult for me to rely on again.

诚以天罔不可重离,圣恩难可再恃。
的确认为国家法纪不可以重犯,圣恩难以反复依赖。
I intimately sense the meaning in Watching the Mouse, that if a man does not observe the rites, he should die immediately.

窃感《相鼠》之篇,无礼遗死之义,形影相吊,五情愧赧。
私下里有感于《相鼠》所言人不守礼,不如速死的深刻含义,不禁形影相吊,五内如焚,惭愧无比。
I feel quite lonely, anxious and shameful.

以罪弃生,则违古贤"夕改"之劝;
因罪轻生,那样做是违背古圣先贤"早上有错,傍晚改正"的劝勉;
If I abandon my life due to my crimes, I will be acting in opposition to the advice of the ancient superior man that 'a mistake in the morning will be corrected by the evening.'

忍活苟全,则犯诗人"胡颜"之讥。
而苟且偷生,又涉嫌诗人"何不速死"的讥刺。
If I live bare, it is just as what the poet satires:"Why not die right away?

伏惟陛下德象天地,恩隆父母,施畅春风,泽如时雨。
我俯首思考陛下德配天地,恩逾父母,施予像春风时雨一样舒畅温润。
I humbly think your majesty's virtue is like heaven and earth - your passions are stronger than that of parents, your grace is like the spring breeze, and your beneficence is the timely rain.

是以不别荆棘者,庆云之惠也;
因此对荆棘之流不另眼相看,这是五色祥云的恩惠;
It is therefore by favor of the colorful and auspicious clouds that show no prejudice against the thistles;

七子均养者,尸鸠之仁也;
七子都得到平等的哺育,那是布谷鸟般的仁爱;
it is the benevolence of the cuckoo that the seven chicks receive their equal feeding;

舍罪责功者,明君之举也;
允许戴罪立功,那是圣明君王的举动;
it is a demonstration of a sagacious monarch to allow me to redeem myself with good services;

矜愚爱能者,慈父之恩也:
怜悯愚钝的而爱护有才的,这是慈父般的恩德:
it is the love of an affectionate father who shows sympathy for the stupid child and protects the talented one;

是以愚臣徘徊于恩泽而不能自弃者也。
这就是我始终巡徘徊于君主恩泽之中而不能自我放弃的原因。
this gives the reason that I linger out in the grace of the monarch and cannot give myself up.

"前奉诏书,臣等绝朝,心离志绝,自分黄者无复执珪之望。
"上次接到诏书,禁止我等诸侯进京朝见,我当时心灰意冷,自付到老也难得再有持珪朝见的指望了。
"Last time, I received the decree that prohibited me and other vassals from having an audience with the monarch in the capital, and I sank into a great depression, thinking there would be no hope of reaching old age for me to see your majesty, holding the jade tablet.

不图圣诏猥垂齿召,至止之日,驰心辇毂。
没想到圣诏竟然屈尊召唤,人刚到京,心就已经飞到了您的身边。
Unexpectedly the imperial decree summoned me condescendingly. I had hardly arrived at the capital when my heart flew to your side.

僻处西馆,未奉阙廷,踊跃之怀,瞻望反仄。
但住在西馆僻静的房间里,一直没有机会朝见,那种迫不及待的心情,使我翘首瞻望,坐卧不宁。
I was put up in the quiet room of the west hostel and did not receive any summoning order. Because of this, I could not help expressing my feelings and emotions.

谨拜表献诗二篇,其辞日:'於穆显考,时惟武皇,受命于天,宁济四方。
谨上此表并献诗二篇,其辞为:"伟大的先父,就是武皇,受命于天,安定四方。
Humbly I pay my tribute to you with two poems. The first reads: Our great father, Emperor of War of the time, has passed away, He received the mandate from heaven to pacify and benefit the four sides.

朱旗所拂,九土披攘,玄化滂流,荒服来王。
红旗所指,九州归降,德化广布,臣服远方。
His red flags waved everywhere, and the nine lands became submissive, His virtue spread far and wide, and even remote people came to pay tributes.

超商越周,与唐比踪。
超越商周,功比有唐。
His empire surpassed the Shang and Zhou Dynasties, And his merits could be compared with that of Tang Yao's.

笃生我皇,奕世载聪,武则肃烈,文则时雍,受禅炎汉,临君万邦。
诞有我皇,聪明倜傥,武功勇烈,文才辉煌,受禅炎汉,君临万邦。
Our emperor was born and grew up wisely and extraordinarily. In war, he fought courageously; for literature, he wrote brilliantly. He received the throne of the Han Dynasty, and dominated all the states.

万邦既化,率由旧则;
万邦受教,遵循旧章;
All the states received his benevolence, and followed the written laws and conventions.

广命懿亲,以藩王国。
推广天命,至亲封王。
In order to extend the heavenly mandate, he enfeoffed the most intimate prince, The prince was garrisoned in the border state to defend the central empire.

帝日尔候,君兹青土,奄有海滨,方周于鲁,
帝曰尔侯,君此青州,统辖海滨,治理一方,譬如鲁君,拱卫周王,
The emperor said,"To you marquis, I give this land of Qing Province, It covers the areas along the seaside, and you rule a part of the empire, Just as the vassal of Lu State defended and protected the king of the Zhou Dynasty.

车服有辉,旗章有叙,
车驾耀眼,服饰闪光,显示尊贵,旗帜徽章,
Your carriages are brilliant, your clothes and decorations are splendid, Your banners and emblems demonstrate your nobility,

济济隽义,我弼我辅。
惟贤与德,辅弼皇上。
You should assist and support your monarch with great virtue and wisdom.

伊予小子,恃宠骄盈,举挂时网,动乱国经。
无知小子,恃宠骄狂,扰乱国纪,触犯法网,
Having violated the laws and broken the imperial prohibitions, You, ignorant son, are arrogant and rely on the imperial favor.

作藩作屏,先轨是堕,傲我皇使,犯我朝仪。
身为藩屏,行为悖妄,怠慢使臣,触犯朝纲。
As a state in the border areas, you were weird in conduct, You slighted the court envoy, and defied the ceremonial rules."

国有典刑,我削我细,将置于理,元凶是率。
国有刑律,职削爵降,依法论罪,罪无可宽。
The empire has its laws and will impose its penalties. My official position was demoted and my noble rank was degraded, I was punished according to the laws, and it is I who committed the crimes.

明明天子,时笃同类,不忍我刑,暴之朝肆,违彼执宪,哀予小子。
圣明天子,手足情深,不忍判罚,暴露朝堂,哀怜违宪,小子无恙。
The sagacious Son of Heaven had sympathy for the brotherhood, Did not bear to mete out punishments and expose me in the law court. He did not execute the laws and showed sympathy for me.

改封充邑,于河之滨,股肱弗置,有君无臣,
改封鄄城,与河为邻,官吏不设,有君无臣,
I was changed in enfeoffment to Juancheng, and lived on the riverside. Where there were no officials, and a single ruler without any subordinate.

荒淫之阙,谁弼予身?
放荡错失,谁为匡正?
For my unrestrainedness and mistakes, who would correct them?

茕茕仆夫,于彼冀方,嗟予小子,乃罹斯殃。
形影相吊,冀州一角,悲叹小子,活罪难逃。
I was so lonely and lived in one corner of Ji Province, I sighed for myself that I could not escape the suffering.

赫赫天子,恩不遗物,冠我玄冕,要我朱。
赫赫天子,恩施万物,赠我玄冠,衣赐锦绣。
The illustrious Son of Heaven left nothing uncared, Bestowed on me black crown, and granted me a red silk band.

朱光大,使我荣华,剖符授玉,王爵是加。
锦裳无语,天子之心,封王赐玺,符节为凭。
The red silk band was bright and pompous, decorating me with glory and honor. I was granted the imperial tallis and jade, and conferred on the noble rank of prince.

仰齿金玺,俯执圣策,皇恩过隆,祗承怵惕。
仰承金玺,俯持策命,春风浩荡,惭愧圣恩。
I looked up to accept the gold seal, and I bent to carry out the decree of the emperor. The imperial grace was so munificent that I accepted it with prudence and vigilance.

咨我小子,顽凶是婴,逝惭陵墓,存愧阙廷。
小子可叹,屡触厄运,羞对先祖,抱愧当廷。
I sighed for myself about the frequent misfortune I felt ashamed in facing my father's tomb and repented for what I did to the royal court.

匪敢傲德,实恩是恃,威灵改加,足以没齿。
非敢傲慢,实仗皇恩,改封加级,难忘威灵。
I dared not be arrogant, but only relied on the grace of the emperor. I was changed with enfeoffment and promoted in the noble rank, The grace is enough for me to owe a debt of lifelong gratitude.

昊天罔极,性命不图,常惧颠沛,抱罪黄垆。
昊天无极,人生有限,忧罪无功,抱恨黄泉。
The vast sky is limitless, but life is limited; I often fear drifting, and without any deed I will certainly regret in the nether world.

愿蒙矢石,建旗东岳,庶立豪,微功自赎。
愿冒矢石,树旗东岳,希建微功,稍减罪愆。
I am willing to face arrows and stones, and to erect banners on the East Mountains, In the hope of rendering some meritorious services to atone for my crimes.

危躯授命,知足免戾,甘赴江湘,奋戈吴越。
赴汤蹈火,不惧凶险,免罪知足,乐于征战,挥戈满弦,楚越之间。
If I am allowed to fight, I will be satisfied only at exemption from my crimes. I am willing to battle in the areas of the Changjiang River and the Xiangjiang River, And to wield my weapon in the regions of Wu and Yue States.

天启其衷,得会京畿,迟奉圣颜,如渴如饥。
慧灵天启,衷心天鉴,远听天音,近见天颜,如饥似渴,小子夙愿。
Heaven reveals its sincerity that I am able to meet your majesty in the capital. It is so late that I look forward to seeing the face of the Son of Heaven with great eagerness.

心之云慕,怆矣其悲,天高听卑,皇肯照微!
倾心仰慕,悲怆待命,天高听低,君肯照微!
I am so yearning, and dolorous in waiting And hope that the lofty heaven can listen to the humble one's words, And the emperor will condescend to care for the belittled subject."

又日:'肃承明诏,应会皇都,星陈夙驾,秣马脂车。
另又说:"敬受圣主明诏,允许进京朝觐,星夜整治车马,以便清晨启程,车轴加油马吃饱,马疾车轻好驰骋。
"Another poem reads: I was summoned in great honor by the monarch, and allowed to pay a visit in the capital. For a whole night I had horses fed, and carriages oiled for starting off early.

命彼掌徒,肃我征旅,朝发鸾台,夕宿兰渚。
命令车夫,整肃行旅,晓启鸾台,夜宿兰渚。
I ordered the driver to pack up carefully and seriously for the journey. In the morning, I left my palace; and in the evening I set up on the riverside.

芒芒原隰,祁祁士女,经彼公田,乐我稷黍。
茫茫原野,纷纷士女,路过公田,乐我稷黍。
In the vast open country, there were so many men and women, I passed by the imperial fields and was thrilled to see the exuberant crops.

爱有樱木,重阴匪息;
树浓荫,不忍休息;
The big bending trees with luxuriant foliage provided shade but I did not rest.

虽有糇粮,饥不遑食。
虽有干粮,忍饥饿不食。
Although we had solid food, we did not eat to stave off the hunger.

望城不过,面邑匪游,仆夫警策,平路是由。
望城不过,见邑不游,仆夫挥鞭,驱驰照旧。
We did not enter the cities we saw; and did not pay a visit to the passing towns. The driver wielded the plate, and the horses galloped as usual on the level roads.

玄驷蔼蔼,扬镳漂沫;
驷马玄黑,蹄声得得,昂首喷诞,风驰电掣;
The four pure black horses ran on and on, raised their heads and sprayed their saliva.

流风翼衡,轻云承盖。
流风猎猎,绕我车衡,轻云舞蹈,来聚车顶。
Flowing wind passed by my carriage sides, and light clouds gathered on my carriage top.

涉润之滨,缘山之隈,遵彼河浒,黄阪是阶。
穿过山阴,顺涧而行,穿山过涧,黄陂近临。
We forded along the mountain streams, and ran along the foot of the mountains, We moved forward along the riverside and approached the Huangban Slope.

西济关谷,或降或升;
西过潼关,或下或上;
We ran west through the Tongguan Pass, sometimes upward and sometimes downward.

骖倦路,再寝再兴。
马困人乏,睡醒再进。
The horses were exhausted, men were sleepy. After a short rest, we hurried on our way.

将朝圣皇,匪敢晏宁:
将朝圣上,谁敢消停;
We were going to have an audience with his majesty, and no one dared delay.

弭节长鹭,指日遗征。
止节长奔,限日速征。
To stop resting, we ran on a long road, and hurried forward for the fixed date.

前驱举燧,后乘抗旌;
前驱举火,后车持旌;
The men in front held torches, the men in the rear supported banners.

轮不辍运,鸾无废声。
轮不停转,铃不住声。
The wheels revolved constantly, the bells rang continuously.

爱暨帝室,税此西墉;
来到帝京,暂住西城;
Having arrived in the imperial capital, we put up in the west hostel.

嘉诏未赐,朝觐莫从。
暂未宣召,不可朝觐。
The imperial summon has not arrived, we could not have an audience with his majesty.

仰瞻城阈,俯惟阙廷;
瞻望宫阙,遥拜内廷;
I look forward at the palace gates, and offer the distant prayer to the court;

长怀永慕,忧心如醒。"
长怀渴慕,忧心如醒。"
I am long eager for the interview, and am worried as if I was sick."

帝嘉其辞义,优诏答勉之。
文帝对诗词内容及其文采表示嘉许,下诏书好言回答并予以勉励。
Emperor Wen expressed his praise for the contents and the diction, and issued the edict to answer the poem with encouragement.

六年,帝东征,还过雍丘,幸植宫,增户五百。
黄初六年,文帝东征,回师时路过雍丘,临幸曹植王宫,给曹植增加食邑五百户。
In the sixth year, the emperor went on the east expedition. On his return to Yongqiu, he visited the prince's palace, and rewarded him with five hundred households.

太和元年,徙封浚仪。
明帝太和元年,改封曹植到浚仪。
In the first year of the Taihe Period in the reign of Emperor Ming, he was re-enfeoffed to Junyi.

二年,复还雍丘。
太和二年,又回雍丘。
In the second year, he was moved back to Yongqiu.

植常自愤怨,抱利器而无所施,上疏求自试日:"臣闻士之生世,人则事父,出则事君;
曹植常常愤恨抱怨,认为自己空有一身才能却无处施展,于是上疏请求试用说:"我听说士人活在世上,在家侍奉父亲,离开家庭则侍奉君主;
Cao Zhi often felt resentful that he was intelligent but had nothing to do, so he wrote the memorial to seek an opportunity for a trial:"I, your subject, learn that a scholar who lives in this world should serve his father at home and the monarch out of his home.

事父尚于荣亲,事君贵于兴国。
侍奉父亲以使亲族荣耀为上,侍奉君主以使国家振兴为贵。
The service of father aims at bringing honor to the family, and the service of the monarch strives for prosperity of the empire.

故慈父不能爱无益之子,仁君不能畜无用之臣。
所以慈父不能爱无益于亲族的儿子,仁君不能容忍无助于国家振兴的臣子。
Therefore, a loving father cannot love a useless son, and a benevolent monarch cannot keep a worthless subject.

夫论德而授官者,成功之君也;
能根据德行授予官职的,就是能成大事的君主;
If a man receives his appointment on account of his virtue, the monarch must be a successful monarch;

量能而受爵者,毕命之臣也。
能衡量自己能力接受爵位的,定是可以尽忠于国家的臣子。
and a man will receive his rank of nobility according to his ability, provided that he is a devoted subject.

故君无虚授,臣无虚受;
所以君主没有虚授官职的,臣子也没有虚受职务的。
Therefore, a monarch does not appoint a subject who can do nothing, and a subject does not receive an appointment for which he has no capacity.

虚授谓之谬举,虚受谓之尸禄,《诗》之"素餐'所由作也。
虚授被称为谬举,虚受被称为尸禄,《诗经》中的"素餐'就是因此而作的。
An appointment of a useless official would be called an improper promotion, and the reception of an appointment with no capacity would be berated as 'salary for a living corpse'. The poem about 'meal of idleness' in The Book of Poetry was written solely to describe this phenomenon.

昔二虢不辞两国之任,其德厚也;
从前虢仲、虢叔不推辞两国的任命,是因为他们德行深厚的缘故;
A long time ago, Guo Zhong and Guo Shu did not decline the appointments of the two countries just because of their great virtues;

旦、爽不让燕、鲁之封,其功大也。
周公旦、召公爽不推辞燕、鲁的封地,是因为他们的功劳很大的缘故。
Duke Dan of Zhou and Duke Shi of Shao did not refuse the enfeoffed land of Yan and Lu just because of their meritorious contributions.

今臣蒙国重恩,三世于今矣。
而微臣蒙受国家的大恩,至今已历三朝了。
Your humble subject has received huge favors of the country for three successive reigns today.

正值陛下升平之际,沐浴圣泽,潜润德教,可谓厚幸矣。
正赶上陛下政治升平的时候,沐浴着陛下的恩泽,默默感受着仁德教化,可以说是非常幸运了。
Now it is a prosperous and peaceful time under your majesty's reign, and for me it is really a great luck to be bathing in your imperial grace and to be silently cultivating virtues.

而窃位东藩,爵在上列,身被轻暖,口厌百昧,目极华靡,耳倦丝竹者,爵重禄厚之所致也。
但我被封在东部的藩国,爵位列于上等,身披着轻软暖和的衣服,口中吃厌了各种美味,眼睛看惯了华丽奢侈的装饰,耳朵听腻了丝竹管弦的声音,这都是爵位太高、俸禄太厚所造成的。
I unjustly occupy the position in the eastern border areas, and I am listed in the top noble rank; I wear light and warm be clothes, and I am fed up with hundreds of flavors of delicious food; I have seen the extreme luxury and resplendence, and I am tired of listening to the string and woodwind music. This restlessness is because I have enjoyed a top noble life with handsome emoluments.

退念古之授爵禄者,有异于此,皆以功勤济国,辅主惠民。
转念想到古代授赐爵位俸禄的制度,跟我眼下的情况有所区别,那都是授给勤劳为国,辅君惠民的有功之人的。
I recall that in the ancient time, it was quite different making appointments, conferring noble ranks and giving emoluments. Those receivers all made great contributions to the country, assisted the monarch and facilitated the people.

今臣无德可述,无功可纪,若此终年无益国朝,将挂风人"彼其'之讥。
现在我没有德行可以称述,没有功劳可以记录,如果像这样长年无益于国家,那就要应了诗人"他这个人,才德与官服不相称'的讥刺。
Now I have no virtues told and no feats recorded. If my life ends in this way without benefiting this dynasty, I will be the target of satire by the poets' works, stating, 'This man's talent and virtue is incompatible with his official position'.

是以上惭玄冕,俯愧朱绂。
所以我上愧头上的玄色王冠,下愧腰间的朱红王服。
Therefore, I feel ashamed for wearing the black prince hat above and fastening the red silk band around the waist below.

"方今天下一统,九州晏如,而顾西有违命之蜀,东有不臣之吴,使边境未得脱甲,谋士未得高枕者,诚欲混同宇内以致太和也。
"当今天下一统,九州和睦,但回眸四顾,西边仍有违抗王命的刘蜀,东边还有不肯臣服的孙吴,这使得守边将士还不能卸甲归田,谋士们也还不能够高枕无忧,确实是要统一天下以达太平了。
"Now the whole empire is in reunification, and the nine divisions of the whole land are in peace. However, if we look around, in the west there is the Shu Empire, challenging our domination, and in the east there is the Wu Kingdom refusing to submit. On account of the current situation, our soldiers in border areas can not remove their armors, and the strategists cannot sleep with high soft pillows. It is indeed the time to reunify the whole land in order to come to a great harmony.

故启灭有扈而夏功昭,成克商、奄而周德著。
过去夏启灭了有扈氏而令夏朝的武功昭彰,成王克商灭奄,周朝的威德才得以彰显。
Therefore, Qi eliminated the Youhu tribes to demonstrate the military feats of the Xia Dynasty; King Cheng conquered the Shang Dynasty and wiped out Yan State to display the virtues of the Zhou Dynasty.

今陛下以圣明统世,将欲卒文、武之功,继成、康之隆,简贤授能,以方叔、召虎之臣镇御四境,为国爪牙者,可谓当矣。
现在陛下以圣贤之道治理天下,将要完成文王、武王那样的功业,继承成王、康王的鼎盛局面,选贤任能,用方叔、召虎那样的臣子镇守四方边境,充当国家的爪牙,可以说是再恰当不过的了。
Now your majesty is ruling the country with the ways of sages, and will accomplish the feats as that of King Wen and King Wu, continuing the prosperity of King Cheng and King Kang of the Zhou Dynasty. You need to employ the virtuous and capable men, appoint officials like Fang Shu and Shao Hu to control and defend the border areas in the four directions as claws of the empire. It is the most proper thing to do.

然而高鸟未挂于轻缴,渊鱼未县于钩饵者,恐钓射之术或未尽也。
然而高飞的鸟没有挂在轻丝箭绳上,深渊中的鱼还没有张嘴吞钩,究其原由,大概是钓、射二途尚未穷尽机巧。
However, the flying bird has not been fastened on the light silk arrow thread, and the fish in the abyss has not opened its mouth to bite the hook, I am afraid that the crafts of shooting and fishing are not perfect.

昔耿弇不俟光武,亟击张步,言不以贼遗于君父。
从前耿弇不等光武帝到达,就迅速出击张步,说是不能把贼寇留给君王。
A long time ago, Geng Yan did not launch a rapid attack on Zhang Bu until Emperor Guangwu arrived, saying that he could not leave a thief to the monarch.

故车右伏剑于鸣毂,雍门刎首于齐境,若此二士,岂恶生而尚死哉?
所以从前齐王的车右卫士因为左轮鸣响而伏剑自刎,雍门狄因为越兵侵入齐境而自杀,像这两个人,难道是厌恶生而喜欢死吗?
In the ancient time, the right side carriage guard for the king of Qi State committed suicide upon hearing the clangs in the left wheel; Yongmen Di committed suicide because of the invasion of the Yue army into the Qi territory. Were the two men tired of life and fond of death?

诚忿其慢主而陵君也。
实在是对怠慢或凌辱君主的行为深恶痛恨的缘故。
It was indeed because they hated the behaviors of slighting and insulting the monarchs.

夫君之宠臣,欲以除患兴利;
大凡君主宠爱臣下,是需要他们为国家兴利除害;
As usual, the favored officials of a monarch want to eliminate troubles and bring benefits.

臣之事君,必以杀身请乱,以功报主也。
臣子侍奉君主,一定要全身赴难,立功报答君主。
A minister serving his monarch must end the trouble with suicide in order to express his gratitude.

普贾谊弱冠,求试属国,请系单于之颈而制其命;
从前贾谊刚刚成年,就要求试用他去整治属国,希望亲手捆住单于的脖子置之于死地;
In the past, when Jia Yi was 20 years old, he applied for a position to conquer the subject country, and hoped to kill Chanyu by tying his neck down.

终军以妙年使越,欲得长缨缨其王,羁致北阙。
终军十八岁出使南越,也想用长缨牵着南越王来帝京朝拜汉朝天子。
Zhong Jun, at the age of 18, went to South Yue on an envoy, and he also wanted to draw the king of South Yue with a long ribbon to the capital to have an audience with the emperor.

此二臣,岂好为夸主而耀世哉?
这两位大臣,难道是要向皇帝夸口而向世人炫耀自己吗?
Did these two ministers just want to brag and show themselves off?

志或郁结,欲逞其才力,输能于明君也。
是因为抱负有时候郁结在心里,要施展才力,奉献给英明的君主罢了。
It was because they cherished the ambitions that they wanted to demonstrate their talents and abilities, and dedicate themselves to the wise monarchs.

昔汉武为霍去病治第,辞日:"匈奴未灭,臣无以家为!"
从前汉武帝为霍去病营建住宅,霍去病推辞说:"匈奴未灭,为臣不必有家!
Long ago, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty constructed mansions for Huo Qubing, but he declined and said,"The Huns have not been wiped out. As a minister I should not have a home!'

夫忧国忘家,捐躯济难,忠臣之志也。
忧国忘家,舍身救难,那是忠臣的志向。
It is the aspiration of a loyal minister that leads him to ignore his own home, to worry about the country, and to devote himself to overcoming difficulties.

今臣居外,非不厚也,而寝不安席,食不味者,伏以二方未克为念。
现在臣身居外藩,并不是俸禄不厚,可是却睡不安稳,饮食无滋无味,是挂念着吴、蜀二国还没有平定的缘故。
Now I live in the border areas. It is not because the emoluments are not substantial that I cannot sleep soundly and eat with relish, but because I am deeply concerned about the fact that the Wu Kingdom and the Shu Empire remain unconquered.

"伏见先武皇帝武臣宿将,年者即世者有闻矣。
"看到先父武皇帝的武臣旧将,年老去世的时有所闻。
"I have met the old generals and military officials under our father Emperor Wu, and from time to time I learned that some of them died of old age.

虽贤不乏世,宿将旧卒,犹习战陈,窃不自量,志在效命,庶立毛发之功,以报所受之恩。
虽然世上不缺贤者,老将旧卒,也还在操练战阵,私下不自量力,确有为国效力的志向,也许能建立微小的功劳,报答所受的大恩。
Although there is no lack of virtuous men, the old generals and veterans are still exercising military formation. I personally overrate my own abilities, and have the will to dedicate my life. Suppose I could obtain even a tiny achievement, that would be my requital of your favors.

若使陛下出不世之诏,效臣锥刀之用,使得西属大将军,当一校之队,若东属大司马,统偏舟之任,必乘危蹈险,骋舟奋骊,突刃触锋,为士卒先。
倘若陛下能破例下诏,让臣发挥出小小的用处,使我西属大将军曹真,带领一支人马,或者隶属于东边的大司马曹休,统领一部分水兵,我必定赴汤蹈火,骋船催马,冲锋陷阵,身先士卒。
If your majesty could issue an exceptional edict to let me, your subject, function even as a knife or an awl. For example, I could be like a petty officer under the leadership of Great General Cao Zhen in the west to head a detachment, or perhaps serve under the leadership of Marshal Cao Xiu in the east to head some navy forces. With certainty I would defy all dangers and difficulties, speed my boat or gallop on a steed, and charge at the head bravely with a sword in the battlefields.

虽未能擒权馘亮,庶将虏其雄率,歼其丑类,必效须臾之捷,以灭终身之愧,使名挂史笔,事列朝策。
尽管不一定能擒住孙权、割下诸葛亮的脑袋,或者亦可能俘虏敌人的将帅,歼灭敌军,让我能用须臾的胜利,洗去终身的耻辱,也使自己能够名垂史册,事列丹青。
Even though I cannot capture Sun Quan, or cut off the left ear of Zhuge Liang, maybe I can capture some enemy generals and eliminate our opposers. Let me have a moment of victory to clear away my lifetime of regret. Let my name be recorded in the history book, and my deeds in the dynastic documents.

虽身分蜀境,首县吴阙,犹生之年也。
即使在蜀地粉身碎骨,在吴国断头高悬,也如同获得了新生。
Even if my body were cut into halves in the Shu territory or my head hung on the gate of the Wu Kingdom, I would obtain a new life.

如微才弗试,没世无闻,徒荣其躯而丰其体,生无益于事,死无损于数,虚荷上位而忝重禄,禽息鸟视,终于白首,此徒圈牢之养物,非臣之所志也。
如果微小的才能不能被试用,默默无闻地死去,白白地享受荣誉,养肥身体,活着对国家没用,直到死去还是无声无息,徒然占据很高的爵位享用优厚的待遇,养尊处优,直到白头,就像笼子里的鸟雀一般的活着,实在不是臣所抱的志向。
If my little talent is not tested and I die unknown, if I just enjoy the honor and fatten my body to no avail, if I keep myself alive uselessly and die as a nobody, lost into oblivion, occupying a high rank of nobility with handsome emoluments, and live like a bird or a chicken until I become whitehaired, it is, after all, not my aspiration to live like an animal in a cage.

流闻东军失备,师徒小衄,轻食弃餐,奋袂攘衽,抚剑东顾,而心已驰于吴会矣。
传闻征东大军失于防备,吃了小亏,我饮食不进,磨拳擦掌,抚剑东望,心早已飞驰到吴会了。
When I heard of the east-conquering armies suffering from a small setback due to the neglect of precaution, I could not eat or drink. I felt indignant and held the sword while looking to the east, as my heart had already flown to Wu and Kuaiji Prefectures.

"臣昔从先武皇帝南极赤岸,东临沧海,西望玉门,北出玄塞,伏见所以行军用兵之势,可谓神妙矣。
"臣从前跟随先父武皇帝南到赤岸,东临沧海,西望玉门,北出玄关,看到他行军用兵的策略变化,可以说是神机妙算了。
"Once I followed the late Emperor Wu to reach the red banks in the extreme south, to approach the vast seas in the east, to watch the Yumen Gate in the west and to march out of the Xuan Pass in the north. I saw his strategic and tactic changes in marches and battles, and his skills could be considered real wonders.

故兵者不可豫言,临难而制变者也。
所以战争不能预言,临敌再根据形势采取相应的变化才最关键。
and a war couldn't be predicted. It is crucial to adapt to the relevant changes according to the situations when confronting with enemies.

志欲自效于明时,立功于圣世。
我一心想效力于这清明的年月,立功于圣明的朝代。
I have the aspiration to dedicate myself to this enlightened time and to make contributions to this dynasty.

每览史籍,观古忠臣义士,出一朝之命,以徇国家之难,身虽屠裂,而功铭著于鼎钟,名称垂于竹帛,未尝不拊心而叹息也。
每次阅读史籍,看到那些古代的忠臣义士,霎那间将自己的生命交出,以殉身国家的危难,身体虽被宰割分裂,但功绩铭刻在鼎钟之上,名字书写于史册之内,没有哪一次不曾抚心叹息的。
Every time I read from history books I see that those ancient loyal officials and upright men gave their lives in a moment for their endangered country. The books describe how their bodies were cut and separated. Their meritorious deeds were inscribed on the tripods and bells, while their names were also recorded in the history books. I could not help sighing and beating my breast!

臣闻明主使臣,不废有罪。
臣听说英明的君主用人,不废斥曾经有罪的。
I have learned that the wise emperors, when employing officials, do not abandon those who committed crimes.

故奔北败军之将用,秦、鲁以成其功;
所以秦国、鲁国起用打过败仗当过逃兵的将军孟明视、曹沫,最终成就大功;
Therefore, it is because the Qin and Lu States reappointed the generals like Meng Mingshi and Cao Mo, who were once defeated but escaped with their lives, that they were able to win great victories.

绝缨盗马之臣赦,楚、赵以济其难。
楚国、赵国赦免了绝缨盗马的臣子,结果关键时刻靠他们解救了危难。
It is because the officials, who once molested an imperial concubine, and the men, who once stole the king's horse, were exempted that they rescued Chu and Zhao States from calamities.

臣窃感先帝早崩,威王弃世,臣独何人,以堪长久!
我私下想到先帝早崩,威烈君王弃世而去,而我是什么人,凭什么能活得这么长久!
I have personally thought of what kind of man I am to have lived such a long life, while the first emperor demised early and the powerful emperor departed from this world.

常恐先朝露,填沟壑,坟土未干,而身名并灭。
常常担忧死得太快,坟上的土还没有干,而身和名已经全都泯灭了。
I am often apprehensive that my death will come quickly before the morning dew dries, that my body will fill a ditch, and my body and name will all sink into oblivion while the earth of my tomb is still wet.

臣闻骐骥长鸣,则伯乐照其能;
臣听说好马长声嘶鸣,伯乐就能辨认出它的能力;
I have learned that when a steed gave a long neigh, Bole could make a judgment of its ability.

卢狗悲号,则韩国知其才。
卢狗悲声吠叫,韩国就知道它的本领。
and when a lu dog howled, the people of Han State knew its capacity.

是以效之齐、楚之路,以逞千里之任;
因为这个缘故,所以要让好马奔驰于齐、楚大道之上,以验证及表现它日行千里的能量;
Therefore, to be put to good use, let a steed gallop on the thoroughfares of Qi and Chu States to demonstrate in full its ability to run a thousand li.

试之狡免之捷,以验搏噬之用。
让名犬追逐敏捷的狡兔,以检验它奔跑、厮咬的本领。
Let a good dog chase a nimble rabbit to present its ability to chase and bite.

今臣志狗马之微功,窃自惟度,终无伯乐、韩国之举,是以於邑而窃自痛者也。
现在臣的志向是建立犬、马那么微小的功劳,可是私下里度,却没有伯乐、韩国那样的举荐者,所以心情抑郁而私自感伤。
Now, I have the strong desire for the tiny feats of a dog or a horse. Nevertheless, in my private estimation, in the end I cannot attract anyone to recommend me as a Bole or as a man of Han State. That is why I feel depressed and am in pain.

"夫临博而企竦,闻乐而窃抃者,或有赏音而识道也。
"面临博戏而抬起脚跟看得出神的人和听见音乐而私下打拍子的人,也许是知音或懂得博戏之道的。
"Men who approach gambling on tiptoe or hear music in measured beats may know the principles of gambling or understand the theory of music.

昔毛遂,赵之陪隶,犹假锥囊之喻以寤主立功,何况巍巍大魏多士之朝,而无慷慨死难之臣乎!
从前的毛遂,不过是赵国诸侯的一名门客,尚且借着锥处囊中的比喻,来启发主人而立下功劳,何况在如此人才济济的伟大魏国的朝廷,竟没有慷慨赴难的大臣吗!
Long ago Mao Sui was only a parasitic guest in the house of a marquis in Zhao State. He used the metaphor of an awl in a bag to enlighten his master and establish his achievements. For such a great Wei Empire with so many talented men, is there not anyone who is ready to die heroically?

夫自炫自媒者,士女之丑行也。
自我吹嘘、自找婆家的,那是士女的丑陋行径;
Anyway, it is a shameful act for a scholar to sing his own praise or a girl to find a husband by herself.

干时求进者,道家之明忌也。
干谒求官,这是有道者的显明忌讳。
To interfere with your majesty's consideration and to plead with you for an appointment are obvious taboos for a man of principle.

而臣敢陈闻于陛下者,诚与国分形同气、忧患共之者也。
而臣所以敢向陛下陈述这些话,实在是因为和国家同气连枝、忧患与共的缘故。
However, the reason I dare talk about such things with your majesty is really because I share blood relations, weal and woe with this country.

冀以尘雾之微补益山海,荧烛末光增辉日月,是以敢冒其丑而献其忠。"
希望能以尘土雾气那么小的东西来使山海有所增加,以萤火虫、蜡烛那么弱的光来为日月增辉,所以敢冒羞耻献上一颗忠心。"
I wish to contribute my strength, though it may be as small as dust or as light as fog surrounding the mountains and seas, or as weak a light of a glowworm or a candle in comparison to the glory of the sun and the moon. Therefore, I venture to bear shame in order to demonstrate my devotion.

三年,徒封东阿。
太和三年,曹植被改封为东阿王。
In the third year, Cao Zhi was conferred as Prince of Dong'e.

五年,复上疏求存问亲戚,因致其意日:"臣闻天称其高者,以无不覆;
太和五年,曹植再次上书请求探问亲戚,因此表达他的意思说:"臣听说天称为高,是因为它有无所不能覆盖的能力;
In the fifth year, Cao Zhi again sent a memorial for a request to visit his relatives, and he expressed his desire as follows:", your subject, have learned that heaven is called loftiness because there is nothing that it does not cover;

地称其广者,以无不载;
地称为广,是因为它有无所不能承载的能力;
earth is called vastness because there is nothing that it does not bear;

日月称其明者,以无不照;
日月称为明,是因为它们有无所不能照亮的能力;
the sun and the moon are called brightness because there is nothing they do not shine on;

江海称其大者,以无不容。
江海称为大,是因为它们有无所不能包容的能力。
and rivers and seas are called boundlessness for there is nothing they do not include.

故孔子日:"大哉尧之为君!惟天为大,惟尧则之。'
所以孔子说:"伟大呀,尧作君主!只有天可以称大,只有尧能效法于天。"
Therefore, Confucius said, "Great is Yao as a monarch! Only heaven is great, only Yao imitated it.'

夫天德之于万物,可谓弘广矣。
天的恩德对于万物来说,可算是弘大广远了。
As the virtue of heaven spread on all things of creation, it can be said that it is vast and boundless.

盖尧之为教,先亲后疏,自近及远。
尧施行教化,是先亲后疏,由近及远。
Therefore, when Yao gave the instructions, he treated the blood relations before others, and from the near ones to the distant in order.

其《传》日:'克明俊德,以亲九族;九族既睦,平章百姓。
古书上说:"彰明大德,以亲近九族;九族和睦,然后辨别彰明百姓。"
The Biography of Yao said:"He promoted the men of virtue and wisdom because they brought a better relation to the nine classes of his kindred. When the nine classes of his kindred were in harmony, he proceeded to inspect the officials of different surnames and rewarded those with distinguished services.

及周之文王亦崇厥化,其《诗》日:"刑于寡妻,至于兄弟,以御于家邦。'
到周文王时也推崇这种教化,《诗经》说:"首先做妻子的榜样,然后做兄弟的榜样,最后推广到治理整个宗族和国家。
In the time of King Wen of the Zhou Dynasty, he also advocated such culture. The Book of Poetry said:" At first you should set an example for your wife, then an example for your brother, and in the end you extend it to the whole clan and country.'

是以雍雍穆穆,风人咏之。
所以能够融洽和睦,引来诗人的歌咏。
Therefore, harmonious relations attracted poets to write eulogies.

昔周公吊管、蔡之不咸,广封懿亲以藩屏王室,《传》日:'周之宗盟,异姓为后。
从前周公伤心管叔、蔡叔不同心同德,便大肆分封至亲来做王室的藩屏,典籍上说:"周王举行盟会,异姓诸侯排在同姓诸侯的后面。
Long ago, Duke Zhou was so depressed about his disagreeableness with Guanshu and Caishu, he gave most of his land to his close relatives in order to defend the border areas and protect the royal family. The Commentary says:'When an assembly of the kindred alliance was presided over by the king of the Zhou Dynasty, the vassals of different surnames were arranged behind those of the same surname.'

诚骨肉之恩爽而不离,亲亲之义实在敦固,未有义而后其君,仁而遗其亲者也。
的确是骨肉的恩情,尽管有小差错也不能分离,尊奉父母的意义其实在于诚补坚定,没有讲求大义却把君主摆在后面,大谈仁德却遗弃自己父母的道理。
It is indeed that the small differences could not separate people with blood relations. The significance of respect and service to parents lies in honesty and steadfastness. There is no such reason as to seek great righteousness by putting the monarch behind, and to talk widely about benevolence while abandoning one's own parents.

"伏惟陛下资帝唐钦明之德,体文王翼翼之仁,惠洽椒房,恩昭九族,群后百寮,番休递上,执政不废于公朝,下情得展于私室,亲理之路通,庆吊之情展,诚可谓恕已治人,推惠施恩者矣。
"陛下具有唐尧开明的德行,体用文王恭谨的仁爱之心,融洽王室,施恩九族。列侯百官,轮番休息,依次入值执政不废除公开的朝议,下情能够上达到内廷,宗族之间的联系很通畅,庆贺吊问的感情能够自由抒发,真可以说是扩充自己的仁爱之心去治理百姓,广泛地实施恩惠了。
"I humbly think that your majesty possesses the enlightened virtue of Tang Yao, practices the respectful and discreet benevolence of King Wen, harmonizes the imperial family, and brings benefits to the nine classes of kindred. The marquises and all officials take turns for rest and duty. Your majesty engages in the administration without neglecting affairs. You receive in your house true affections. Your exchange of greetings with relatives is unobstructed, and your feelings of celebration and condolence are expressed in an appropriate fashion. It can be eulogized that your majesty is considerate in your administration, extending benefits and favors widely.

至于臣者,人道绝绪,禁锢明时,臣窃自伤也。
至于臣,与亲戚的联系已经断绝,被禁锢在这个政治清明的时代,私下常常自悲自怨。
As your subject, I have lost contact with all my relatives. I am imprisoned in this enlightened dynasty, and am often sorrowful and critical of myself.

不敢乃望交气类,修人事,叙人伦。
不敢过分地希望能与志同道合的朋友相交,讲求与亲人来往,叙一叙亲戚间的人情。
I dare not have an excessive desire to make friends with those who share the same aspirations, to keep in contact with relatives, or to discuss my feelings with others.

近且婚媾不通,兄弟乖绝,吉凶之问塞,庆吊之礼废,恩纪之违,甚于路人,隔阂之异,殊于胡越。
近来亲戚无联系,兄弟无来往,吉凶祸福的消息闭塞,庆贺慰问的礼节荒废,亲情的疏绝,比路人还严重,隔绝的程度,比胡、越还要遥远。
Now I have no contact with relatives by marriage and no connections between brothers. The channels for my inquiries about their fortunes or misfortunes are obstructed, and the rituals of celebrations and condolences have had to be abandoned. The separation of feelings between me and my relatives is even more serious than that between strangers, because the distance is even more remote than that between the Hu and Yue tribes.

今臣以一切之制,永无朝觐之望,至于注心皇极,结情紫阔,神明知之矣。
现在臣下由于这一切的制约,永远也没有朝见的指望了。至于倾心皇上,情系朝廷,神明是知道的。
Now owing to all restrictions, I, your subject, have no hope in requesting an audience with your majesty forever. As for my whole-hearted concern for your majesty and the fixation of my passions for the court, only gods know their depths.

然天实为之,谓之何哉!
但这是皇上定下的规矩,我还能说些什么呢!
However, this is the decree prescribed by your majesty, and what can I say?

退唯诸王常有戚戚具尔之心,愿陛下沛然垂诏,使诸国庆问,四节得展,以叙骨肉之欢恩,全怡怡之笃义。
诸王大概都有这种想要亲近的心意,希望陛下尽快下诏,让各封国互相慰问,庆贺四时之节,畅叙骨肉之间的欢乐恩爱,成全兄弟间和顺怡人的深厚情谊。
I fear to think the princes often have the same feelings in regards to mutual relations and contacts. I wish your majesty could issue an edict as soon as possible to permit greetings and celebrations between the enfeoffed states, so that they could celebrate the holidays during the four seasons, in order to chat about joys and the feelings between blood relations. It would help brothers to create more harmonious and deeper feelings for each other.

妃妾之家,膏沐之遗,岁得再通,齐义于贵宗,等惠于百司,如此,则古人之所叹,风雅之所咏,复存于圣世矣。
让妃妾的家庭,互赠脂膏一类的化妆品,一年两次,与贵成享有一样的待遇,和百官平等地享受思惠,这样,古人所赞叹的,古诗所咏唱的情景,就会在今天的圣世重新出现了。
and the families of the concubines could present each other with cosmetics such as cream twice a year, enjoying the same treatment as the noble relatives, equally receiving favors as the various officials do. Through these methods, the ideals in which the ancients praised and the splendor eulogized in ancient songs will reappear in today's prosperous dynasty.

"臣伏自惟省,无锥刀之用。
"我俯伏着自我反省,连锥刀那么小的用处也没有。
"I humbly examine myself, thinking I am not even as useful as an awl or a knife.

及观陛下之所拔授,若以臣为异姓,窃自料度,不后于朝士矣。
及至看到陛下所提拔任命的官员,似乎把我当作异姓了,而我私下里付度,自己并不比那些朝臣落后。
I have observed the officials that your majesty promoted, and they seem to treat me as a man of a different surname, but I privately speculate that I myself do not lag behind those courtiers.

若得辞远游,戴武弃,解朱组,佩青绂,驸马、奉车,趣得一号,安宅京室,执鞭珥笔,出从华盖,入侍辇毂,承答圣问,拾遗左右,乃臣丹诚之至愿,不离于梦想者也。
倘若能够摘下远游冠,戴上武升帽,解下华丽的朱衣,佩上青丝带,或驸马都尉,或奉车都尉,快快地得到一个职务,安宅于京城,手持马鞭,插着毛笔,出门则紧跟着皇上的华盖,入门则侍奉在皇上的身边,承接应答皇上的提问,在皇上左右拾遗补缺,是我赤诚的愿望,梦寐以求的理想。
If I could take off the noble-rank hat, and wear the military official hat, unfasten the red ribbon and fasten the blue ribbon, and promptly be given a position of either cavalry captain or carriage captain, I would settle down in the capital. Afterwards, I would hold the whip, insert a writing brush on the hat, and closely follow the imperial canopy when on an outing; or serve at the sides of the emperor, receive and answer your majesty's questions, and provide support for needs and omissions. These are my sincere aspirations, and ideals I dream of.

远慕《鹿鸣》君臣之宴,中咏《常棣》匪他之诫,下思《伐木》友生之义,终怀《萝莪》罔极之哀;
远远地向往着《鹿鸣》这首诗所描绘的君臣的宴乐,中间讽咏《常棣》诗中"兄弟匪他"的诗句,再下思《伐木》重视"友生"的深远含意,终于感怀《蓼莪》无法报答父母之恩的悲哀。
I look forward to the banquet of the monarch and his officials in the distant future described in "Yo Yo, Cry of the Deer". There is a recitation of "brothers are not others" in "The Flower of the Bush Cherry Tree". Another in "Lumbering" makes me think of the meaning of friendship. In the end, I have an extreme grief because I am unable to requite my gratitude for my parents as described in "Long and Strong Is the Trailing Plant".

每四节之会,块然独处,左右惟仆隶,所对惟妻子,高谈无所与陈,发义无所与展,未尝不闻乐而拊心,临觞而叹息也。
每当四时节令的盟会,孤独一身,旁边只有仆人奴隶,面对的只有妻子儿女,高谈阔论却没有对象,发表见解却没人要听,没有哪次听到音乐不捶胸,面对酒杯不叹气的。
In the past, every time a festival arrived in the four seasons, I felt lonely because around me were only servants and slaves, and facing me were only my wife and children. I had no one as a partner for a political or metaphysical discussion, and no one cared to listen to my comments on various issues. Not once when I listened to music, did I not beat my breast; not once when I faced the cup of wine did I not sigh.

臣伏以为犬马之诚不能动人,臂人之诚不能动天。
我认为狗和马的诚意不能动人,就好比是人的诚意不能感动上天。
I humbly think that the sincerity of a dog or a horse cannot move human beings, just as the sincerity of human beings cannot move heaven.

崩城、陨霜,臣初信之,以臣心况,徒虚语耳。
杞梁妻哭崩长城,邹行的冤屈使夏天降霜,我以前深信不疑,可用我的心和他们相比,这一切全都是虚假谎言罢了。
Qi Liang's wife cried to collapse the Great Walls, and Zou Yan's grievance caused the fall of frost in summer. I never doubted them before. However, in comparison of my heart to theirs, all these are just false allegations.

若葵藿之倾叶太阳,虽不为之回光,然向之者诚也。
葵藿转动叶子承受阳光,太阳虽然不为它回转光线,然而向着它的意愿是诚挚的。
Sunflowers always face the sun, though they cannot reflect light, and yet they always face it in sincerity.

窃自比于葵藿,若降天地之施,垂三光之明者,实在陛下。
私下把自己比作葵藿,而像天地一样布施恩泽,像日、月、星辰一样普降光明的,其实就在于陛下。
I, your subject, compare myself to a sunflower. Your majesty is like heaven and earth bestowing favors, and like the sun, the moon and stars that shed light.

"臣闻《文子》日:"不为福始,不为祸先。'
"我听说《文子》讲过:"不做首先享福的,也不做首先惹祸的。"
"I have learned in Wenzi that it is important "Not to be the first to enjoy happiness, and not to be the first to cause trouble."'

今之否隔,友于同忧,而臣独倡言者,窃不愿于圣世使有不蒙施之物。
现在的隔绝不通,兄弟们都同样忧虑,可是只有臣一人提出来,是因为私心不愿意让圣世出现没有蒙受到恩惠的东西。
About today's obstruction of contact, my brothers have the same worries, but only I, your subject, speak out, because personally I do not wish to see things that do not receive favors in this prosperous dynasty.

有不蒙施之物,必有惨毒之怀,故《柏舟》有"天只"之怨,《谷风》有"弃子"之叹。
若有不曾蒙受恩惠的东西,那一定会引起强烈的怨恨,所以《柏舟》有"母也天只,不谅人只"的怨声,《谷风》有"将安将乐,女转弃子"的嗟叹。
If someone does not receive favors, he will undoubtedly harbor resentment. Therefore, in "Boat of Cypress Wood", the man complains,'Mother, O heaven, you do not care about me.' In "Valley Wind", the woman sighed,' In the time of ease and happiness, you have unfaithfully abandoned me."

故伊尹耻其君不为尧、舜，孟子日:'不以舜之所以事尧事其君者，不敬其君者也。
所以伊尹对他的君主不效法尧舜感到耻辱，孟子说:"不像舜侍奉尧那样侍奉自己君主的人，是不尊敬君主的人。
Therefore, Yi Yin felt ashamed when his monarch did not follow the examples of Yao and Shun. Mengzi said,'He, who does not serve his own monarch like Yao and Shun, is a man who does not respect his monarch.'

臣之愚蔽，固非虞、伊；
我很愚笨，固然不是虞舜、伊尹之辈；
I am so stupid and ill-informed that it goes without saying that I am not Yu Shun or Yi Yin.

至于欲使陛下崇光被时雍之美，宣缉熙章明之德者，是臣楼楼之诚，窃所独守。
至于要让陛下推崇和善亲族的美德，弘扬唐尧光明的德行，那是我恭谨的诚意，我一直独自保持着不想改变。
It is my sincere and respectful wish that your majesty promote and spread the virtue of harmonious relations between people, advocating the clear and brilliant virtue in which I have always maintained.

实怀鹤立企伫之心，敢复陈闻者，冀陛下傥发天聪而垂神听也。"
实在是怀着鹤一样孤立企盼的心情期望着愿望的实现，所以敢一再冒昧地陈述，是希望陛下用天生的聪明来听一听臣下的倾诉并予以采纳。"
I really expect, feeling like a solitary and expecting crane, the fulfillment of my wish. That is why I dare present my opinions again, hoping your majesty can condescend to listen to me with your sagacity."

诏报日:"盖教化所由，各有隆弊，非皆善始而恶终也，事使之然。
明帝下诏回答说:"教化所经由的途径，各有兴隆和衰弊，并不都是开始很好最终就变坏了，而是事势使它成了那个样子。
The imperial edict in reply said:"The different ways of cultivation may result in desirable or undesirable effects,but it is not necessarily that they start well and end badly because it is the changing situations that shape them.

故夫忠厚仁及草木，则《行苇》之诗作；
所以忠厚施行到草木身上，就有人作出《行苇》的诗篇；
Therefore,when honesty and benevolence were extended to grass and trees, someone wrote the poem 'Patches of Reeds'.

恩泽衰薄，不亲九族，则《角弓》之章刺。
恩泽衰薄，不亲九族，就有人作出《角弓》的诗篇讥刺。
When the imperial favors were few, and the nine classes of kindred were not in harmony,'Bow Inlaid with Horn' was written in response.

今令诸国兄弟，情理简怠，妃妾之家，膏沐疏略，朕纵不能敦而睦之，王援古喻义备悉矣，何言精诚不足以感通哉？
现在让各诸侯国兄弟之间，情义简慢，妃妾的家庭脂膏的互赠也减少了，我即使不能使他们亲厚和睦，而你援引古训讲明的道理也够全面了，为什么说精诚不能够感通呢？
Today the brothers in the enfeoffed states are in rare contact with each other. There are few exchanges of greetings and feelings, and the concubines present less cosmetic cream to each other. I have learned of all the reasons that you have comprehensively explained, using the citations of ancient instructions,but even so,it is possible that I cannot make them more intimate and harmonious. Why do you say with the utter sincerity that I cannot move people?

夫明贵贱，崇亲亲，礼贤良，顺少长，国之纲纪，本无禁固诸国通问之诏也，矫枉过正，下吏惧谴，以至于此耳。
判明贵贱等级，崇尚亲族和睦，礼待贤良人士，理顺少长关系，是国家的根本秩序和法纪，本来就没有禁止各封国之间互通问候的诏令，由于矫枉过正，下级官吏害怕被处罚，所以才弄到今天这种地步罢了。
To classify the ranks of nobility and humbleness, advocate the harmony in kindred, treat virtuous and worthy men with politeness, straighten out the relations between the old and the young - these are the fundamental orders and laws of the empire. There is no edict prohibiting the mutual greetings and exchanges between the enfeoffed states. The low-ranking officers overcorrected when executing the regulations for fear of punishment, and things have gradually developed to the present state.

已敕有司，如王所诉。"
已经着令有关部门，遵照你所陈述的去办。"
I have ordered the relevant department to do as you have wished."

植复上疏陈审举之义，日:"臣闻天地协气而万物生，君臣合德而庶政成；
曹植又上书陈述明察和选拔官吏的道理，他说:"臣听说天地二气交合才能化生万物，君臣志同道合才能办好政事；
Cao Zhi again submitted a memorial on the principles of examination and selection of officials, and said:"I,your subject, have learned that the communion between the heavenly qi and the earthly qi can produce all things of creation,and a monarch and his officials sharing the same goals can have a good administration of the country.

五帝之世非皆智，三季之末非皆愚，用与不用，知与不知也。
五帝时代世上并不是人人都聪明，夏、商、周三代的末年也并不是人人都愚蠢，是在贤人的问题上用和不用，知与不知的缘故。
In the times of the five emperors, not everyone in the world was wise,and in the last years of the Xia, Shang and Zhou Dynasties, not everyone in the world was ignorant, The true problems laid in employment, abandonment,and the good judgment or the inability to judge virtuous and capable men.

既时有举贤之名，而无得贤之实，必各援其类而进矣。
已经有了举荐贤人的名义，事实上却没有得到贤人，那一定是大家都各自把自己的同类推荐上来了。
From time to time, the recommendation of virtuous and capable men remains only in name, and there is no real obtainment of virtuous and capable men. It must have been that each recommends his own kind.

谚日: "相门有相，将门有将。'
谚语说:"宰相门里出宰相，将军门里出将军。"
as the proverb goes: Out of the gate of a prime minister emerges a prime minister; and out of the gate of a military general walks a military general.

夫相者，文德昭者也；
宰相，必须文才品德昭著；
A prime minister must have a prominent literary talent and virtues;

将者，武功烈者也。
大将，必须武功显赫。
a general must have illustrious war exploits.

文德昭，则可以匡国朝，致雍熙，稷、契、夔、龙是也；
文才品德昭著，才能辅佐朝廷，使国家达到太平和乐，稷、契、夔、龙就是这样的人；
Only a man with prominent literary talent and virtues can assist the royal dynasty and lead the country to peace and harmony,such as Ji,Xie, Kui,Long.

武功烈，则可以征不庭，威四夷，南仲、方叔是矣。
武功显赫，才能去征伐那些异端叛逆，威慑四夷，南仲、方叔就是这样的人。
Only a man with illustrious war exploits can conquer rebels, and inspire awe in the minority tribes on the four borders, such as Nan Zhong and Fang Shu.

昔伊尹之为腰臣，至贱也，吕尚之处屠钓，至陋也，及其见举于汤武、周文，诚道合志同，玄谟神通，岂复假近习之荐，因左右之介哉！
从前伊尹作陪嫁的奴隶，那是最低贱的地位了；姜子牙处在屠夫渔民的行列，那是最卑下的工作了。可是等到他们被推荐给汤武、周文王的时候，那真是志同道合，神机妙算而心神相通，哪还用得着借助亲近之人的举荐，靠着身边宠臣的介绍呢！
In the ancient times,Yi Yin was a bride's slave,the humblest in social position; Li Shang was an angler and a butcher,the lowest in profession.When they were recommended to King Tang of Shang and King Wen of Zhou,the kings and ministers shared in earnest the same aspirations, the wonderful foresight of military operations, and mutual tacit understanding.Is there any need to recommend a man with the assistance of some close men, or to introduce a man by reliance on the favorable officials?

书日:"有不世之君，必能用不世之臣；用不世之臣，必能立不世之功。'
《尚书》说:"有非常之君，定能用非常之臣；用非常之臣，定能立非常之功。"
The Book of History said: "If there is an unusual monarch, he can for sure employ an official with unusual abilities; if an unusual official is employed, he will certainly accomplish extraordinary feats.'

殷周二王是矣。
殷、周的汤王、文王是这样的。
King Tang of Shang and King Wen of Zhou set the examples.

若夫龌龊近步，遵常守故，安足为陛下言哉！
至于那些局促保守、停步不前、循规蹈矩、毫无魄力的人又哪里值得对陛下说呢！
Those who were narrow-minded and shallow in conformity to conventions are not worth mentioning to your majesty!

故阴阳不和，三光不畅，官旷无人，庶政不整者，三司之责也。
所以阴阳不能调和，三光不能普照，官位空旷缺乏适当人选，各种政务得不到治理，这属于三司应承担的责任；
Therefore, when yin and yang cannot be harmonized, the three lights cannot shine extensively. The vacant official positions can not be filled with suitable candidates, and daily administrative affairs can not be properly executed.These are the responsibilities of the three dukes.

疆场骚动，方隅内侵，没军丧众，干戈不息者，边将之忧也。
战场骚乱，领土被侵犯，败军丧师，战争不断的责任，应由守卫边疆的大将来担当。
And as for chaos on the battlefields, invasion of territories, loss of soldiers and military defeats, and constant battles, these are the duties of the generals defending the frontiers.

岂可虚荷国宠而不称其任哉？
难道能白白享受朝廷的恩宠而不胜任自己的职务吗？
Can they only receive royal favors without bearing the proper responsibility?

故任益隆者负益重，位益高者责益深，《书》称"无旷庶官"，《诗》有"职思其忧"，此其义也。
所以职务越高其负担也就越重，官位越高其责任也就越大，《尚书》说"不要使不称职的人任官"，《诗经》有"官员思虑他分内的事"的说法，就是这个意思。
Therefore,the higher the position is, the heavier the responsibility a man should shoulder; and the higher the official rank is,the more important duties an official should bear.The Book of History said:" Among the officials, there should not be one who is not capable.' The Book of Poetry said:"An official should think his duty.' This is the meaning.

"陛下体天真之淑圣，登神机以继统，冀闻"康哉"之歌，偃武行文之美。
"陛下具有天生的善良纯厚的品性，登上皇位继承帝业，希望听到"康哉"那样的歌声，看到偃武修文的升平盛世。
"Your majesty with the natural good virtues has ascended the throne and succeeded in the imperial cause.He wishes to hear the song like 'Peace,Ha!' and see a state of peaceful prosperity where cultural development flourishes instead of war.

而数年以来，水早不时，民困衣食，师徒之发，岁岁增调，加东有覆败之军，西有殪没之将，至使蚌蛤浮翔于淮、泗，解鼬喧哗于林木。
可是多年以来，旱涝灾害不时发生，百姓缺衣少食，军队一年比一年增加调派的人数，再加上东边有几乎全军覆没的部队，西边有中箭身亡的大将，以至于蚌蛤在淮河、泗水一带游动，黄鼠鼬在林木上喧哗。
However, in the past few years, droughts and floods took place from time to time, and common people lacked clothes and food.The army increased its number of soldiers year after year, and in the east a troop was nearly eliminated.In the west, a great general was shot dead. Between the areas of the Huai and the Si Rivers swam fresh water mussels and clams, and yellow weasels made noises in the woods.

臣每念之，未尝不辍食而挥餐，临觞而扼腕矣。
我每每想起这些事，总是吃不下饭，对着酒杯扼腕愤激不已。
Whenever I think about these things, I can not eat and always feel agitated in face of the wine cup.

昔汉文发代，疑朝有变，宋昌日:"内有朱虚、东牟之亲，外有齐、楚、淮南、琅邪，此则磐石之宗，愿王勿疑。
从前汉文帝从代郡国到京城继承皇位，顾虑朝中会发生变故，宋昌说:"朝内有朱虚侯、东牟侯那样的亲人，外面有齐、楚、淮南、琅邪四王，这都是磐石一样坚固的宗亲，希望您不必疑虑。"
Long ago, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty left Dai Prefecture to accede to the throne,and worried about the possible usurpation in the court. Song Chang said,'In the court there are your close relatives like Marquise Zhu Xu and Marquise Dong Mou. Outside you have Prince of Qi, Prince of Chu, Prince of Huainan and Prince of Langya. They are the relatives of the same clan, firm as a rock.I wish your majesty not to doubt it!'

臣伏惟陛下远览姬文二虢之援，中虑周成召、毕之辅，下存宋昌磐石之固。
我希望陛下远观虢仲、虢叔对周文王的帮助，其次想想召公、毕公对周成王的辅佐，最后再把宋昌关于宗族坚如磐石的说法记在心中。
I humbly wish your majesty first take view of the assistance of Guo Zhong and Guo Shu to King Wen of Zhou, then think about the assistance of Duke Shao and Duke Bi to King Cheng of Zhou,and finally bear in mind Song Chang's words claiming that the clan is firm as a rock.

普骐骥之于吴阪，可谓困矣，及其伯乐相之，孙邮御之，形体不劳而坐取千里。
从前骐骥在吴阪，可说是走投无路了。等到伯乐相中了它，孙邮驾驭着它，形体不曾劳损而轻易地日行千里。
Long ago,the steed at Wuban found himself in a dire and difficult situation,but Bole discovered the steed, and Sun You rode on it for a thousand li without any physical exhaustion.

盖伯乐善御马，明君善御臣；
伯乐善相马，明智的君主善于驾驭臣子；
Bole was an expert of horse physiognomy, as well as a wise monarch and expert of employing officials.

伯乐驰千里，明君致太平；
伯乐能使马奔驰千里，明君能使天下达到太平；
Bole was able to drive a swift horse, and a wise monarch is able to bring peace.

诚任贤使能之明效也。
这实在都是任用贤能所取得的明显功效。
This is indeed the obvious effect of appointing virtuous men and employing talents.

若朝司惟良，万机内理，武将行师，方难克弭。
如果朝廷各部门都选用好官，繁多的政务都经由文官得到治理，武将帅师出征，铲平祸乱，安定国家。
If the three highest officials are virtuous and capable in court,the affairs in all aspects are well-administered, military generals are able to command the armies to defeat enemies on the frontiers.

陛下可得雍容都城，何事劳动銮驾，暴露于边境哉？
陛下就能够在都城无忧无虑，又何必劳动陛下的车驾，让它暴露在边境之上呢？
then your majesty can stay in the stately capital. Why do you need to ride the imperial carriage to expose yourself at the frontiers?

"臣闻"羊质虎皮，见草则悦，见豺则战，忘其皮之虎也。
"臣听说"羊披着虎皮，看见草就高兴，看见狼就发抖，忘了它身上披的是虎皮了"。
"I,your subject, learned the following fable,"A sheep even under a tiger skin was delighted to see grass, but shook at the sight of a jackal, because he forgot that he was wearing a tiger skin.'

今置将不良，有似于此。
现在设置的将领不适当，也与这个很相似。
Now the generals appointed are not desirable, and it is similar to this fable.

故语日:'患为之者不知，知之者不得为也。'
所以有人说:"怕就怕任事的人不知道做，而知道做的人又不能任事。
Therefore, the saying goes,"The worry is that the doer who is ignorant does not know how to do,while the man who knows how to do does not have a chance."

昔乐毅奔赵，心不忘燕；
从前乐毅逃到赵国，内心不忘燕国；
In the ancient times, Yue Yi fled to Zhao State, but he never forgot Yan State in his heart;

廉颇在楚，思为赵将。
廉颇身在楚国，却一心想当赵国的大将。
Lian Po was in Chu State, but he only thought of himself as a general of Zhao State.

臣生乎乱，长乎军，又数承教于武皇帝，伏见行师用兵之要，不必取孙、吴而暗与之合。
臣生于乱世，长在军中，又多次受到武皇帝的教诲，曾看到他行军用兵的要领，不必取孙子、吴起的兵法之书来对照而与兵法暗合。
I,your subject,was born in chaotic times,and grew up in the army. Furthermore, many times I received the instructions of Emperor Wu.I once saw with my own eyes the essentials of his command of the armies and the battles, and it was not necessary to read and compare the books of the warcraft by Sunzi and by Wu Qi, because they often coincided.

窃揆之于心，常愿得一奉朝觐，排金门，蹈玉陛，列有职之臣，赐须之间，使臣得一散所怀，摅舒蕴积，死不恨矣。
私下在心里揣度，总希望能够在朝廷侍奉，进金门，踏玉阶，排列在有职务的臣子之中，赐给我不时陈述愚见的资格，让我施展一下抱负，舒发一下蕴积，就死而无憾了。
I secretly speculate and always wish that I could serve in the court, enter the golden gate, walk on the jade steps, line in with the dutiful officials, receive opportunities to put my abilities into good use,and express my pent-up ambitions, thus dying with no regret.

"被鸿胪所下发士息书，期会甚急。
"看到鸿胪下达的征调士兵之子的通告，集合报到的日期非常急迫。
"I have read the bulletin the Foreign and State Affairs Ministry issued to recruit the sons of soldiers, and the time for assembly is urgent.

又闻豹尾已建，戎轩骛驾，陛下将复劳玉躬，扰挂神思。
又听说皇帝的车驾已安排了，兵车很快就要出发，陛下又将劳动玉体，费神费心。
Again I have heard that the imperial carriages are ready. The war carriages will fly out, and your majesty will again exert yourself and tax your mind.

臣诚速息，不遑宁处。
我实在惶恐不安，不能平静地度日。
I,your subject,am indeed in terror and panic, unable to live at ease.

愿得策马执鞭，首当尘露，撮风后之奇，接孙、吴之要，追慕卜商起予左右，效命先驱，毕命轮毂，虽无大益，冀有小补。
希望能够扬鞭催马，首先冒着尘土、露水，手握着风后的奇经，执掌着孙子、吴起用兵的要领，像卜商一样能发明孔子的思想，效力先驱，尽忠尽力，虽然不一定有大用，或者能有小补。
I wish I could wave the whip,drive the horses, and charge in front to bear dust and dew.I would master the uniqueness of Feng Hou's warcraft, understand the essentials of Sunzi and Wu Qi's warcraft, follow Bu Shang closely to elaborate on Confucian thought, and serve at your majesty's side. I would risk my life to run in front of and dedicate my life before your wheels. I may not bring great benefits, but I hope I could be of some assistance.

然天高听远，情不上通，徒独望青云而拊心，仰高天而叹息耳。
但上天听觉高远，情意难以通达，只能独自望着苍天而抚胸长叹。
However, heaven is lofty and cannot hear me from so far away. My feelings cannot be heard by your majesty, and I can only look up into the blue clouds, beat my breast and sigh at the lofty sky.

屈平曰:"国有骥而不知乘，焉皇皇而更索!
屈原说:"国家有骐骥却不知道骑乘，何用急急忙忙地寻找好马呢!"
Qu Ping said,'The country has the best steed but does not know how to ride. Why is it so hurriedly looking for another one?'

昔管、蔡放诛，周、召作弼；
从前管叔、蔡叔被流放处死，周公、召公担任辅相；
In the ancient times, Guanshu and Caishu were exiled to death, while Duke Zhou and Duke Shao assisted the monarch;

叔鱼陷刑，叔向匡国。
叔鱼触犯了刑律，叔向却扶助了国家。
Shu Yu violated the law,whereas Shu Xiang assisted the country.

三监之衅，臣自当之；
"三监"那样的罪过，由我一人来承当；
I will alone bear the responsibility for this offense of the three supervisors.

二南之辅，求必不远。
周公、召公那样的辅弼，去找寻一定不会太远。
The assistance, like that from Duke Zhou and Duke Shao, should not exist faraway if it is sought after.

华宗贵族，藩王之中，必有应斯举者。
宗室贵族、藩王当中，一定有合适的人选。
In the royal clan among the nobles and enfeoffed princes, surely there must be one who can meet the requirement.

故《传》日:"无周公之亲，不得行周公之事。
所以古书上说:"没有周公与成王的那种亲近关系，不能做周公所做的事。
Therefore,as the ancient classic said,'Without the intimate relation between Duke Zhou and King Cheng,one cannot do what Duke Zhou did.'

唯陛下少留意焉。
希望陛下稍稍留意。
I hope your majesty can pay some attention to it.

"近者汉氏广建藩王，丰则连城数十，约则飨食祖祭而已，未若姬周之树国，五等之品制也。
"近世汉皇大肆分封藩王，多的食邑几十座城池相连，少的只能供以祭祀祖宗的罢了，不如周代分封各国用五等爵位的制度。
"Not long ago,the Han emperors generously enfeoffed princes along the border areas. Some had many, even tens of connecting cities and towns,while some had few, just small enough for offering sacrifices to ancestors.It can't be compared with the five degree system of enfeoffment established by the Zhou Dynasty.

若扶苏之谏始皇，淳于越之难周青臣，可谓知时变矣。
至于公子扶苏对秦始皇的谏劝，淳于越对周青臣的问难，可以说是懂得应时变化的道理。
As for Fu Su's persuasion of the first emperor of Qin,and Chunyu Yue's refutation of Zhou Qingchen, it can be said that they understood the principle of adapting to change.

夫能使天下倾耳注目者，当权者是矣。
能让天下人竖起耳朵听，睁大眼睛看的是当权者。
It is the power-holder who can make people under heaven listen and look attentively.

故谋能移主，威能慑下，豪右执政，不在亲戚。
所以计策谋略能够改变主上的旨意，威权能够使下属震慑，豪门大族执政，权力并不在亲戚手里。
therefore,strategy can change the mind of a monarch, and power can intimidate subordinates.When a powerful clan presides over administration, the real power is not in the hands of their relatives.

权之所在，虽疏必重；
权力所在的地方，即使关系疏远也一定要重用；
Where the power is, even though the relation is distant, the holder must bear great responsibility.

势之所去，虽亲必轻。
形势需要罢免，即使是亲戚也一定要看得很轻。
When a situation needs dismissal, even if the relation is intimate, he must be neglected.

盖取齐者田族，非吕宗也；
夺取齐国的是姓田的族人，而不是吕尚的宗族；
The usurpers of Qi State came from the Tian clan, not from the clan of Li Shang.

分晋者赵、魏，非姬姓也。
瓜分晋国的是赵、魏，而不是姬姓之人。
The dividers of Jin State were the people of Zhao and Wei States, not the people with the surname of Ji.

唯陛下察之。
希望陛下明察。
I hope your majesty will have a clear examination.

苟吉专其位，凶离其患者，异姓之臣也。
那些在平安时安于官位，困厄时避开祸患的人，都是异姓的臣子。
Those who cling to positions in auspicious times and depart from their positions in ominous situations are all officials of different surnames.

欲国之安，祈家之贵，存共其荣，没同其祸者，公族之臣也。
希望国家安定，祈祷家族贵重，生存时共享荣华，危亡时同受祸患的人，都是自家宗族的臣子。
Those who cherish the peace of the country, pray for nobility and importance of the clan, and share the prosperity and honor of life are of the same clan. In times of danger, those who suffer from disasters together are officials of the same clan.

今反公族疏而异姓亲，臣窃惑焉。
现在自己家族的臣子疏远，异姓的臣子反而亲近，我私下实在迷惑不解。
Nowadays,the officials of the same clan are estranged, and those of different surnames are closely related. I,your subject,feel confused about it.

"臣闻孟子日:"君子穷则独善其身，达则兼善天下。"
"我听说孟子讲过:"君子困厄的时候就修养自己的品德，显贵的时候就要改善天下人的处境。"
"I,your subject, learned that Mencius once said,"A superior man in difficult times will cultivate his own virtue alone, and in successful times will improve the living of people under heaven.'

今臣与陛下践冰履炭，登山浮润，寒温、燥湿、高下共之，岂得离陛下哉!
现在我与陛下踏薄冰，踩火炭，登山涉涧，无论寒暖燥湿，高高低低都在一起，难道能离开陛下吗!
Now your majesty and I step on thin ice, tread on burning coal, climb mountains and cross streams.We share all these experiences together, no matter if it is cold or warm, dry or wet, high or low. How could I leave your majesty?

不胜愤懑，拜表陈情。
不能承受满腔郁闷的压力，拜上这篇奏章陈述隐情。
I could not bear such a depressing pressure,and because of this I write this memorial to express my hidden feelings.

若有不合，乞且藏之书府，不便灭弃，臣死之后，事或可思。
如有不对的地方，请暂时收在书府，不要毁掉，我死之后，所说的话也许还可供追思。
If there is something wrong,please keep it in the archives temporarily, and do not destroy it. After my death, what I have said may be worth thinking on.

若有豪厘少挂圣意者，乞出之朝堂，使夫博古之士，纠臣表之不合义者。
如有一丝一毫触犯圣意的地方，请求在朝堂上发表，让学问渊博的大臣们，指摘这篇奏章中不合大义的地方。
If I have offended your majesty, I plead to demonstrate it in the reception hall, Let erudite scholar-officials pick out the places incompatible with righteousness.

如是，则臣愿足矣。"
如能那样，我的愿望就满足了。"
If it could be so,my wish would be fulfilled."

帝辄优文答报。
明帝很客气地写了答报的诏书。
Emperor Ming immediately wrote a polite edict as a reply to his letter.

其年冬，诏诸王朝六年正月。
这年冬天，颁布诏令，让诸王在太和六年正月到京师朝见。
In the winter of this year,the edict was issued for the princes to have an audience with the emperor in the capital in the first lunar month of the sixth year.

其二月，以陈四县封植为陈王，邑三千五百户。
二月，以陈郡四县封曹植为陈王，食邑三千五百户。
Cao Zhi was conferred on as Prince of Chen with an area of four counties in the Chen Prefecture,and with the emoluments of three thousand and five hundred households.

植每欲求别见独谈，论及时政，幸冀试用，终不能得。
曹植总想与明帝单独交谈，讨论时政，希望能够被试用，终究没有得到丝毫机会。
Each time Cao Zhi wanted to talk alone to Emperor Ming for discussion of the current political affairs, and hoped to have a chance for a trial use,he never obtained a prime opportunity.

既还，怅然绝望。
回封国以后，心中惆怅而绝望。
Upon returning to the enfeoffed state, he fell into a melancholy despair.

时法制，待藩国既自峻迫，寮属皆贾竖下才，兵人给其残老，大数不过二百人。
当时的法律对待藩国很严苛，部属都是商贾俗人，士兵给的也都是老弱病残，总数不超过二百人。
At that time,the laws for the states were extremely strict, and the subordinates for the state were all businessmen and peddlers.The soldiers were usually disabled and senile, and the largest number of personnel was within 200.

又植以前过，事事复减半，十一年中而三徒都，常汲汲无欢，遂发疾薨，时年四十一。
而曹植因为以前的过失，各方面待遇又减去一半，十一年中竟然三次迁移封国，内心常常郁闷不乐，于是发病去世，时年四十一岁。
Furthermore, owing to the previous faults, one fault would cause a loss of fifty percent on everything he received.Within eleven years, three times he moved to live in different places, and often he fell into a depressive state. Soon he contracted a disease and passed away at the age of 41.

遗令薄葬。
遗嘱命予以薄葬。
He left a will for a simple burial.

以小子志，保家之主也，欲立之。
他认为小儿子曹志是个能保存家业的主子，欲立曹志为嗣。
and held that his youngest son Cao Zhi (志) was a man who could continue the family cause,thus establishing Cao Zhi as his heir.

初，植登鱼山，临东阿，喟然有终焉之心，遂营为墓。
以前，曹植登上鱼山，下临东阿县，喟然叹息，便有了在那儿终老的心思，于是兴建了坟墓。
Long ago when Cao Zhi (植)climbed the Yushan Mountain to look down over Dong'e County, he sighed loudly and thought he would be buried there,so he had his tomb constructed.

子志嗣，徒封济北王。
其子曹志承袭爵位，又改封济北王。
His son Cao Zhi inherited his rank of nobility and was conferred on Prince of Jibei.

景初中诏日:"陈思王昔虽有过失，既克已慎行，以补前阙，且自少至终，篇籍不离于手，诚难能也。
景初年间明帝下诏说:"陈思王过去虽有过失，但后来能约束自己，谨慎行事，弥补了以前的错误，而且从小到老，书籍不离手，实在是难能可贵的了。
In the beginning years of the Jingchu Period, Emperor Ming issued an edict:" Although Prince Si of Chen committed some mistakes in the past,he later restricted himself, behaved prudently,and compensated for his previous faults. Moreover, from his childhood to old age, he studied literature all the way, and this should be considered highly esteemed.

其收黄初中诸奏植罪状，公卿已下议尚书、秘书、中书三府、大鸿胪者皆削除之。
那些黄初年间所有奏报曹植罪状的奏章，公卿以下关于曹植的议论文字，凡收藏在尚书、秘书、中书三府、大鸿胪处的一律销毁。
Those memorials during the Huangchu Period that reported the crimes of Cao Zhi,and all the comments on Cao Zhi by officials below the dukes and ministers, and all that are stored in the Secretariat, State Library and Court Secretariat, and the Ministry of Foreign and State Affairs, should be destroyed.

撰录植前后所著赋颂诗铭杂论凡百余篇，副藏内外。"
收录曹植前后撰写的赋、颂、诗、铭、杂论共一百多篇，制成副本，收在朝廷内外藏书处。"
A collection of Cao Zhi's writings of rhapsodies, hymns,poems, inscriptions,and miscellany, altogether over 100 in number, will be made into different copies to be preserved in the libraries inside and outside court."

志累增邑，并前九百九十户。
曹志多次增加食邑，连同从前的共九百九十户。
The emoluments of Cao Zhi were increased several times, amounting to 990 households with what he owned before included.