王粲字仲宣,山阳高平人也。
王粲,字仲宣,山阳郡高平县人。
Wang Can,alias Zhongxuan,was a native of Gaoping in Shanyang.

曾祖父龚,祖父畅,皆为汉三公。
曾祖父王龚,祖父王畅,都在东汉时位列三公。
His great grandfather Wang Gong,and grandfather Wang Chang,were both dukes of the Han Dynasty.

父谦,为大将军何进长史。
父亲王谦,担任过大将军何进的长史。
His father Wang Qian, was the head officer in the headquarters of Great General He Jin.

进以谦名公之胄,欲与为婚,见其二子,使择焉。
因为王谦是名公的后裔,何进想和他结成姻亲,就把两个儿子引见给他,让他从中挑选一个做东床快婿。
He Jin respected Wang Qian as a descendant of the celebrated dukes and wanted his daughter to marry one of his sons. He had Wang Qian see his two sons and urged him to choose one of them.

谦弗许。
王谦没有答应。
but Wang Qian did not give his consent.

以疾免,卒于家。
后因病免官,在家里去世。
Later he was dismissed from his position due to disease, and died at home.

献帝西迁,粲徒长安,左中郎将蔡邕见而奇之。
献帝西迁,王粲移居到长安,左中郎将蔡邕一见就觉得他非比寻常。
When Emperor Xian moved west, Wang Can transferred his family to Chang'an. Cai Yong,general of the left department of the General Office of Court Affairs,thought him extraordinary upon meeting him.

时邕才学显著,贵重朝廷,常车骑填巷,宾客盈坐。
当时蔡邕的才学名满天下,受到举朝敬重,他家门前经常是车骑填巷,客厅经常是宾客满堂。
At that time, Cai Yong was already well-known for his talent and was well respected in the court. Very often carriages and horses filled up the lane that his house was located on,and distinguished guests frequently paid visits to his home.

闻粲在门,倒屣迎之。
那天蔡邕听说王粲在门口求见,就急忙出迎,连鞋子都穿倒了也顾不得正过来。
When he heard Wang Can was at his gate,he greeted him in such a hurry that he wore his shoes backwards with the heel ahead.

粲至,年既幼弱,容状短小,一坐尽惊。
王粲一进门,年纪不大,身材又矮,使满屋子的人都很吃惊。
When Wang Can arrived, all those present were surprised to see that he looked young, weak, small and short.

邕日:"此王公孙也,有异才,吾不如也。
蔡邕说:"这位就是王畅司空的孙子王粲,才华奇异,我比不上他。
Cai Yong introduced him to the guests," He is a descendant of dukes and is extraordinarily talented. I am no match for him.

吾家书籍文章,尽当与之。"
我家里收藏的书籍文章,应当全部送给他。"
The books and essays stored in my home should be presented to him."

年十七,司徒辟,诏除黄门侍郎,以西京扰乱,皆不就。
十七岁的时候,受司徒征召,朝廷下诏任命为黄门侍郎,王粲都因为西京长安局势混乱,未曾赴任。
At the age of seventeen,the prime minister summoned him to work in his office, and the court appointed him as a court assistant, but he did not accept either of the positions because of the turbulent situations in the western capital.

乃之荆州依刘表。
于是前往荆州投奔刘表。
Instead,he went to Jingzhou City and joined forces with Liu Biao.

表以粲貌寝而体弱通倪,不甚重也。
刘表见王粲其貌不扬,身体孱弱,又不拘小节,对他不很看重。
However,Liu Biao did not value him because of his ugly looks, physical weakness and simple manners.

表卒。
刘表死后。
After the death of Liu Biao.

粲劝表子琮,令归太祖。
王粲力劝刘表的儿子刘琮归附了曹操。
Wang Can persuaded Liu Cong, the younger son of Liu Biao, to join Grand Ancestor.

太祖辟为丞相掾,赐爵关内侯。
曹操任命王粲为丞相掾,赐爵关内侯。
Grand Ancestor appointed Wang Can assistant in his office and conferred on him Marquis of Guannei.

太祖置酒汉滨,粲奉觞贺日:"方今袁绍起河北,仗大众,志兼天下,然好贤而不能用,故奇士去之。
一次,曹操在汉水边上设宴款待百官,王粲举杯祝贺说:"当今袁绍崛起河北,倚仗兵多将广,志在夺取天下,但他喜欢贤才却不能任用,因此杰出之士纷纷离他而去。
Grand Ancestor once offered a banquet at the side of the Han River,at which Wang Can held the wine vessel and congratulated him," Recently Yuan Shao rose from Hebei with the support of a great multitude of soldiers, and had the ambition to seize the whole empire. Despite his liking of talented men,he could not use them and because of this the extraordinary talents left him.

刘表雍容荆楚,坐观时变,自以为西伯可规。
刘表从容坐镇荆楚,坐观时势变化,自以为可以仿效西伯周文王。
Liu Biao calmly defended the Jing and Chu areas, observed closely the change of situations, and he himself thought that he could be compared to King Wen of the Zhou Dynasty.

士之避乱荆州者,皆海内之俊杰也;表不知所任,故国危而无辅。
那些因乱避居荆州的贤能人士,都是国内的俊杰;可刘表却不懂得任用他们,结果当国家面临危难时无人可以辅佐。
The refugees living in Jing Province were all talented and superior men,but Liu Biao could not make use of them. As a result,when his state was in peril,no one came to his aid.

明公定冀州之日,下车即缮其甲卒,收其豪杰而用之,以横行天下;
明公您平定冀州的时候,一下车就忙着整顿冀州的军队,收罗当地的豪杰各尽其用,借此横行天下;
On the day that your brilliant honor settled down peacefully in Ji Province,as soon as you got off your carriage,you were busy training and putting the army in order,gathering all the powerful and talented people in order to make good use of them. By relying on this, you have won your way through all the battles.

及平江、汉,引其贤俊而置之列位,使海内回心,望风而愿治,文武并用,英雄毕力,此三王之举也。"
等到平定了江、汉,又征召这一带的贤才,把他们放在适当的位置上,使天下归心,望风来附,文武并用,英雄尽力,这些都是夏、商、周三代开国之君才能做到的事呢。"
After the settlement of the areas near the Changjiang River and Han River, you again recruited the talented and virtuous men there. You put them in appropriate positions, and restored the country back to normalcy. The people experienced peace for a long term, and were able to employ their abilities in literature, military power; heroes would exert their utmost strengths. All these feats,only the founding monarchs of the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties could do."

后迁军谋祭酒。
后来,王粲升迁为军谋祭酒。
Later, Wang Can was promoted to the army libationer.

魏国既建,拜侍中。
魏国建立以后,官任侍中。
After the founding of the Wei State, he was appointed court assistant.

博物多识,问无不对。
他博学多识,遇到提问没有不能从容应答的。
He was erudite and always ready to give a calm and prompt answer to any question.

时旧仪废弛,兴造制度,粲恒典之。
当时一切旧的礼仪制度废弛殆尽,需要重新制订的东西,常由王粲主持。
Right at that time,almost all of the old ceremonial systems had been abandoned, and the new rites and rules were often created under the presidency of Wang Can.

初,粲与人共行,读道边碑,人问日:"卿能暗诵乎?"
当初,王粲与友人同行,诵读路边古碑文字,友人便问他:"你能背诵吗?"
Early one morning, Wang Can walked together with his friends and read the inscription of an ancient tablet on the roadside. His friends asked him,"Can you recite it?"

日:"能。"
王粲回答说:"能。"
Wang Can answered,"Yes, I can."

因使背而诵之,不失一字。
于是大家让他背对碑文背诵,居然一字不差。
Then upon their request,he recited all the inscriptions without any omission.

观人围棋,局坏,粲为覆之。
看人下围棋,棋局乱了,他帮着人家按原来的布局把棋子重新摆好。
When he watched others play chess, he helped restore what the situation was like before it was a mess.

棋者不信,以帕盖局,使更以他局为之。
下棋的不信,用手帕盖住棋盘,让他换个棋盘重摆。
The players did not believe in him,and so they covered the chessboard with a handkerchief,used another chessboard,and asked him to repeat his analysis.

用相比校,不误一道。
把两副棋盘互相比较,连一道的误差也没有。
He again made the comparison between the two restored occurrences,showing the same without one mistake.

其强记默识如此。
王粲过目不忘的记忆力强到这种程度。
because Wang Can had an impressively strong memory.

性善算、作算术,略尽其理。
而且生来就长于计算,作算术,能很简捷地把问题解答出来。
He was also good at calculating. In solving arithmetic problems,he usually tried to understand them thoroughly and find the simplest way to solve them.

善属文,举笔便成,无所改定,时人常以为宿构;
擅长写文章,提笔一挥而就,不用修改,当时的人常常以为他是预先写好的;
He was an expert at writing essays and wrote them promptly without the need for revision. His contemporaries thought that he prepared his writings beforehand.

然正复精意覃思,亦不能加也。
但是即使专意精深,写出来的文章也不可能更好了。
but there could be no better essays even if he focused his attention and meditated long on his writing.

著诗、赋、论、议垂六十篇。
他共撰写了诗、赋、论、议近六十篇。
Wang Can wrote poems, rhapsodies, theses, comments and many other things, totaling almost sixty works.

建安二十一年,从征吴。
建安二十一年,王粲跟随曹操征伐吴国。
In the twenty-first year of the Jian'an Period, he followed the Grand Ancestor to conquer Wu State.

二十二年春,道病卒,时年四十一。
二十二年春,病死于途中,时年四十一岁。
In the spring of the twenty-second year, at the age of 41,he died of disease on the way.

粲二子,为魏讽所引,诛。
王粲有两个儿子,因为受到魏讽谋反案的牵连,被诛杀。
His two sons were involved in Wei Feng's rebellion and were killed.

后绝。
王粲绝后。
None of his offsprings survived.

始文帝为五官将,及平原侯植皆好文学。
当初文帝曹丕还是五官中郎将的时候,和平原侯曹植都很喜好文学。
At the time when Emperor Wen became the general of General Office of Court Affairs, he and Cao Zhi, Marquis of Pingyuan,were both fond of literature.

粲与北海徐幹字伟长、广陵陈琳字孔璋、陈留阮瑀字元瑜、汝南应场字德琏、东平刘桢字公幹并见友善。
王粲与北海人徐幹字伟长、广陵人陈琳字孔璋、陈留人阮瑀字元瑜、汝南人应场字德琏、东平人刘桢字公幹都被曹丕、曹植所友善。
Wang Can and others, such as Xu Gan of Beihai (also known as Weichang),Chen Lin of Guangling (also known as Kongzhang ),Ruan Yu of Chenliu (also known as Yuanyu),Ying Yang of Runan (also known as Delian),and Liu Zhen of Dongping (also known as Gonggan),were all friends.

幹为司空军谋祭酒属,五官将文学。
徐幹曾任司空军谋祭酒属及五官将文学。
Xu Gan was once an assistant to the army libationer in the prime minister's headquarters, and later he became the head of the literature section of General Office of the Court Affairs.

琳前为何进主簿。
陈琳先前曾任何进主簿。
Chen Lin once was the head secretary of He Jin.

进欲诛诸宦官,太后不听,进乃召四方猛将,并使引兵向京城,欲以劫恐太后。
何进想诛杀所有宦官,太后不同意,何进就召集四方猛将,让他们各自领兵开往京城,想以此要挟太后就范。
When He Jin intended to kill the eunuchs,the dowager refused the suggestion. Afterwards, He Jin summoned courageous generals throughout the empire,and ordered their troops to move towards the capital with the intention to threaten and abduct the dowager.

琳谏进日:"《易》称"即鹿无虞'。
陈琳劝阻何进说:"《周易》称"即鹿无虞'。
Chen Lin persuaded him by stating,"The Zhou Book of Change says,"He chases the deer without the guide of a warden.'

谚有"掩目捕雀'。
谚语说"掩目捕雀'。
The proverb perfectly describes this, stating, 'To catch the sparrow with covered eyes.'

夫微物尚不可欺以得志,况国之大事,其可以诈立乎?
这些弱小动物尚且不能靠欺诈获取,何况是国家大事,怎可以用欺骗手段达到目的呢?
Even such a small and weak animal cannot be caught by cheating,so how is it that such an important imperial affair can succeed in this way?

今将军总皇威,握兵要,龙骧虎步,高下在心;
如今将军总揽朝政,手握兵权,龙骧虎步,进退裕如;
Now you hold the royal power, control the military forces, and any of your movements, whether to advance or retreat like the walking of a dragon or a tiger, can be decided at your own will.

以此行事,无异于鼓洪炉以燎毛发。
以这样的权威办事,无异于鼓洪炉以燎毛发,触之立尽。
However, now that you cope with the matter in this way, it is no different from burning hairs by blasting fire from a huge stove.

但当速发雷霆,行权立断,违经合道,天人顺之;
只要行动迅速,权宜变通而当机立断,有违规矩却合乎道义,上天和百姓都会赞同并支持您的做法;
If you take immediate action, and execute your power with a quick decision, yet you still behave righteously by conforming in the right way despite violating the rites, then heaven and common people will support you.

而反释其利器,更征于他。
您反而放弃有利条件,另行征召各地兵马进京。
On the contrary, you give up the advantageous conditions and summon the troops from the whole empire into the capital.

大兵合聚,强者为雄,所谓倒持干戈,授人以柄;
到时候大兵合聚,强者称雄,您这样做正所谓倒持干戈,授人以柄;
When all the troops gather into the capital, the powerful ones will take the opportunity to claim the throne,and this is, just as the saying goes, to hold a spear reversely while giving the handle to others.

必不成功,只为乱阶。"
非但事情肯定不能成功,只怕反成了祸乱的阶梯。"
You will not realize your purpose,and all the worse,you will cause chaos."

进不纳其言,竟以取祸。
何进不采纳他的建议,结果自取其祸。
He Jin refused to accept his advice, and as a result he incurred trouble.

琳避难冀州,袁绍使典文章。
陈琳逃到冀州避难,袁绍让他主管文稿写作。
Chen Lin sought refuge in Ji Province. Yuan Shao appointed him to be his writing secretary.

袁氏败,琳归太祖。
袁绍失败,陈琳归附曹操。
After the defeat of Yuan Shao, Chen Lin went to serve Grand Ancestor.

太祖谓日:"卿昔为本初移书,但可罪状孤而已,恶恶止其身,何乃上及父祖邪?"
曹操对他说:"你当初为袁绍起草檄文,只数说我一个人的罪状就可以了,所谓憎恨一个人到他身上为止,为什么还要上及我的父亲和祖父呢?"
Grand Ancestor asked him,"When you wrote the essay of my denunciation for Yuan Shao, it is understandable that you counted my crimes. But your hatred of me should have been limited to me alone. Why did you curse my father and grandfather?"

琳谢罪,太祖爱其才而不咎。
陈琳谢罪,曹操爱惜他的才学而未加追究。
Chen Lin apologized and Grand Ancestor did not punish him for valuing Chen Lin's talent.

瑀少受学于蔡邕。
阮瑀年轻时跟随蔡邕学习。
When he was young, Ruan Yu was a student of Cai Yong.

建安中都护曹洪欲使掌书记,瑀终不为屈。
建安年间,都护曹洪打算让他主管文书工作,他始终不愿屈从。
In the Jian'an Period, Marshal Cao Hong had the intention of appointing him as his secretary, but Ruan Yu refused the offer in the end.

太祖并以琳、瑀为司空军谋祭酒,管记室,军国书檄,多琳、瑀所作也。
曹操同时任命陈琳、阮瑀任司空军谋祭酒,负责起草文稿,军国的文书公告,大多出自陈琳、阮瑀之手。
Grand Ancestor appointed both Chen Lin and Ruan Yu as army libationers of the prime minister's headquarters in charge of the secretariat. Military and state documents were often written by them.

琳徙门下督,瑀为仓曹掾属。
后来陈琳调任门下督,阮瑀调任仓曹掾属。
Chen Lin was later promoted to supervisor of the prime minister's writing office and Ruan Yu to supervisor of the state granaries.

场、桢各被太祖辟为丞相属。
应场、刘桢分别被曹操征召为丞相府属官。
Ying Yang and Liu Zhen were respectively appointed as officials in the prime minister's headquarters.

场转为平原侯庶子,后为五官将文学。
应场转任平原侯侍从官,后来担任五官将文学。
Ying Yang was later promoted to assistant of Marquis of Pingyuan, and afterwards head of the literature section in the headquarters of General Office of the Court Affairs.

桢以不敬被刑,刑竟署吏。
刘桢因犯不敬罪判刑,刑满后当了一名小官。
Liu Zhen was imprisoned for his crime of disrespect and became a petty officer after being released from imprisonment.

咸著文赋数十篇。
应场和刘桢都撰有文赋数十篇。
They both wrote many essays and rhapsodies.

瑀以十七年卒。
阮瑀死于建安十七年。
Ruan Yu died in the seventeenth year.

幹、琳、场、桢二十二年卒。
徐幹、陈琳、应场、刘桢都死于建安二十二年。
while Xu Gan,Chen Lin, Ying Yang and Liu Zhen all died in the twenty-second year.

文帝书与元城令吴质日:"昔年疾疫,亲故多离其灾,徐、陈、应、刘,一时俱逝。
文帝曹丕在给元城令吴质的书信中说道:"当年疫病流行,亲朋故旧大多罹难,徐幹、陈琳、应场、刘桢一时间相继去世。
Emperor Wen said in his letter to Wu Zhi, magistrate of Yuancheng:"When the plague broke out, many of my relatives and friends died of it. Xu Gan,Chen Lin, Ying Yang,and Liu Zhen all passed away at the same time.

观古今文人,类不护细行,鲜能以名节自立。
纵观古今文人,大都不拘小节,很少有人能以名节自立于世。
Through a historical perspective, men of letters were more often not prudent about their manners. Few were known after their death for their reputation and integrity.

而伟长独怀文抱质,恬淡寡欲,有箕山之志,可谓彬彬君子矣。
但是,唯独徐幹能够才学与品德兼备,恬淡寡欲,有隐居志向,真称得上是个文质兼备的君子。
and the only exception was Xu Gan. He could really be regarded as a superior man of talent and morality. He had few desires and inclined to living a reclusive life. He is a man of simplicity with great literary talent.

著《中论》二十余篇,辞义典雅,足传于后。
他著有《中论》二十余篇,词意典雅,足以流传后世。
and he wrote over twenty essays named The Golden Mean. His writings were well illocutionary and elegant enough to pass down to generations.

德琏常斐然有述作意,其才学足以著书,美志不遂,良可痛惜!
应场经常有兴致勃勃的创作欲望,他的才学也足够著书立说,但是他的美好愿望却终于没能实现,实在令人深为痛惜!
Ying Yang often had the strong desire to write and he was talented enough to write books; however, his splendid will was not realized,and this indeed was a great pity!

孔璋章表殊健,微为繁富。
陈琳的章表写得相当劲健有力,只是词藻稍嫌繁复。
Chen Lin's memorials were forceful, energetic, and only slightly elaborate.

公幹有逸气,但未道耳。
刘桢才气奔放,但道劲不足。
Liu Zhen's writings overflowed with elegance but not enough vigor and strength.

元瑜书记翩翩,致足乐也。
阮瑀的书札、奏记写得轻灵敏捷,读来令人赏心悦目。
Ruan Yu's letters and memorials were written lightly and nimbly, pleasing both to eyes and to minds.

仲宜独自善于辞赋,惜其体弱,不起其文;
王粲在辞赋方面独有心得,可惜体势欠弱,提不起散文应有的气势;
Wang Can was a singular expert at rhapsodies and narrative poems, and it is a pity that he was so physically weak that he could not make his writings vigorous and energetic.

至于所善,古人无以远过也。
至于他所擅长的辞赋,就是古人也比他强不了多少。
As for his unique narrative poems and rhapsodies, even in comparison to ancient poets,no one could have surpassed him.

昔伯牙绝弦于钟期,仲尼覆醢于子路,痛知音之难遇,伤门人之莫逮也。
从前俞伯牙为钟子期之死摔断琴弦,孔仲尼为子路之死倒掉肉酱,痛惜知音难遇,哀伤活着的弟子没人能赶上他。
In the past, Yu Boya broke his zither for the death of Zhong Ziqi, while Confucius threw minced meat away for the death of Zilu. Respectively,one mourned sorrowfully for his rare friend and another for the unsurpassable student.

诸子但为未及古人,自一时之俊也。"
他们几位的成就只不过赶不上古人,但无疑都是一代俊杰。"
Although these writers can not be compared with the ancient ones, it is no doubt that they are the outstanding writers of their generation."

自颖川邯郸淳、繁钦、陈留路粹、沛国丁仪、丁廙、弘农杨脩、河内荀纬等,亦有文采,而不在此七人之例。
颍川的邯郸淳、繁钦、陈留人路粹、沛国人丁仪、丁廙、弘农人杨脩、河内人荀纬等,也有文学才华,但都不在这七子之列。
Handan Chun and Fan Qin of Yingchuan,Lu Cui of Chenliu, Ding Yi (仪)and Ding Yi (廙)of Pei State,Yang Xiu of Hongnong, Xun Wei of Henei, were all talented in literature,but they are not in the list of these seven writers.

场弟璩,璩子贞,咸以文章显。
应场的弟弟应璩,应璩的儿子应贞,都以文章名重一时。
Ying Yang's younger brother Ying Ju, Ying Ju's son Ying Zhen were all known for their writings.

璩官至侍中。
应璩官至侍中。
Ying Ju's highest official position was that of a court advisor.

贞威熙中参相国军事。
应贞在魏元帝咸熙年间参与相国府军事。
Ying Zhen was a military advisor in the prime minister's headquarters during the Xianxi Period.

瑀子籍,才藻艳逸,而倜傥放荡,行已寡欲,以庄周为模则。
阮瑀的儿子阮籍,才华超迈,文辞艳丽飘逸,而为人倜傥放浪,恬淡寡欲,以庄周为自己的楷模。
Ruan Yu's son Ruan Ji was well-versed and unrestrained. He was tranquil and independent, taking Zhuang Zhou as his example.

官至步兵校尉。
官做到步兵校尉。
His highest official position was that of an infantry colonel.

时又有谯郡嵇康,文辞壮丽,好言老、庄,而尚奇任侠。
当时谯郡还有个嵇康,文辞壮丽,好言老庄,而且崇尚奇节,任侠好义。
At that time, there was also Ji Kang of Qiao Prefecture, whose writings were grandiose and splendid. He liked to talk about Laozi and Zhuangzi, and was gallant and adventurous.

至景元中,坐事诛。
到景元年间,因犯事被杀。
He was sentenced to death for committing a crime in the Jingyuan Period.

景初中,下邳桓威出自孤微,年十八而著《浑舆经》,依道以见意。
景初年间,下邳县桓威,出身低微贫贱,但十八岁就写成《浑舆经》,依照道家学说阐发自己的见解。
During the Jingchu Period, Huan Wei of Xiapi came from a humble family. He wrote The Book of Universe at the age of eighteen and elaborated on his understandings according to Daoism.

从齐国门下书佐、司徒署吏,后为安成令。
任齐国门下书佐、司徒署吏,后来担任安成令。
He was a prefectural head secretary, an official in the premier's headquarters, and later the magistrate of Ancheng in Qi State.

吴质,济阴人,以文才为文帝所善,官至振威将军,假节都督河北诸军事,封列侯。
吴质,济阴郡人,以文才被文帝曹丕所看重,官做到振威将军,假以符节都督河北诸军事,爵封列侯。
Wu Zhi of Jiyin received favor from Emperor Wen for his literary talent, and his highest official position was the power-invigorating general, superintendent of military affairs in the Hebei areas with the imperial tallies,and in the end he was conferred on First-grade Marquis.