郑浑字文公,河南开封人也。
郑浑字文公,河南开封人。
Zheng Hun, also known as Wengong, was a native of Kaifeng in Henan.

高祖父众,众父兴,皆为名儒。
高祖父郑众,郑众的父亲郑兴,都是一时名儒。
Zheng Zhong, his great grandfather, and Zheng Xing, Zheng Zhong's father, were both well-known Confucian scholars.

浑兄泰,与荀攸等谋诛董卓,为扬州刺史,卒。
郑浑的哥哥郑泰,和荀攸等人密谋诛杀董卓,担任过扬州刺史,已去世。
Zheng Tai, Zheng Hun's brother, who had once secretly planned with Xun You and others to assassinate Dong Zhuo, was the supervisor of Yang Province and had already passed away.

浑将泰小子袤避难淮南,袁术宾礼甚厚。
郑浑带着郑泰的小儿子郑袤在淮南避难,袁术以贵宾之礼给予厚待。
Zheng Hun took Zheng Mao, the youngest son of Zheng Tai, to seek refuge in Huainan, and there Yuan Shu treated him generously and respectfully as a distinguished guest.

浑知术必败。
郑浑料知袁术一定失败。
Zheng Hun knew Yuan Shu was doomed to fail.

时华歆为豫章太守,素与泰善,浑乃渡江投歆。
当时华歆担任豫章太守,向来跟郑泰关系不错,郑浑便渡过长江投奔华歆。
Right at that time Hua Xin, who had been a close friend of Zheng Tai, was the prefect of Yuzhang, so Zheng Hun crossed the river and went to him for shelter.

太祖闻其笃行,召为掾,复迁下蔡长、邵陵令。
曹操听说他品行忠厚,召他担任掾史,又升任下蔡县长、邵陵县令。
Grand Ancestor learned about Zheng Hun's honesty in behavior, appointed him an assistant official, and later promoted him to head of Xiacai and magistrate of Shaoling.

天下未定,民皆剽轻,不念产殖;其生子无以相活,率皆不举。
当时天下还没有平定,百姓们强悍轻捷,不考虑生产养殖;孩子生下来难以养活,干脆一概都不生养。
As the situation was still unstable, people remained fierce and ready to wander, no longer concerned with agricultural production and child bearing. Even if children were born, they had nothing to feed them, so no one wanted to have a child.

浑所在夺其渔猎之具,课使耕桑,又兼开稻田,重去子之法。
郑浑每到一地任职,就没收当地人的渔猎工具,督责他们种地养蚕,又开垦稻田,加重对弃子不养的惩处。
Wherever Zheng Hun went, he confiscated fishing and hunting tools from people, urged them to grow crops, to raise silkworms and to open up fields to grow rice as well. He promulgated laws of serious punishments to those who abandoned their children.

民初畏罪,后稍丰给,无不举赡;所育男女,多以郑为字。
开始百姓怕犯法,后来衣食逐渐富足,没有人再过着朝不保夕的日子了;大家生下来的男孩女孩,很多都取郑字为字。
People at the beginning were only afraid of punishments, and when their life became somewhat better, all had children, and often named their children after Zheng Hun.

辟为丞相掾属,迁左冯翊。
后来郑浑被征召担任丞相掾属,升左冯翊。
He was later appointed secretary to the prime minister, and afterwards promoted to prefect of Zuofengyi, a capital district.

时梁兴等略吏民五千余家为寇钞,诸县不能御,皆恐惧,寄治郡下。
当时梁兴等人驱掠五千多户人家一同烧杀抢掠,附近各县无力抵抗,都很恐惧,纷纷把官署迁移到郡城。
When Liang Xing and his followers migrated officials and people of over five thousand families, killing and plundering as they went, the counties could not resist them. The magistrates were all in panic and moved their offices temporarily to the prefectural seat.

议者悉以为当移就险,浑日:"兴等破散,窜在山阻。虽有随者,率胁从耳。"
议论的人认为郡治也应当转移到险要地方,郑浑说:"梁兴的势力都是些散兵游勇,在山间险地流窜,虽然有很多同伙,大都是被迫跟随他的。"
In discussion of the situation, they all suggested shifting the prefectural seat to a more strategic place with difficult access, but Zheng Hun disagreed, "Liang Xing's brigands are scattering and roving widely in the precipitous mountain areas. Although he has many followers, they are all accomplices under duress."

今当广开降路,宣喻恩信。而保险自守,此示弱也。"
现在应当广开投降的门路,宣传晓谕朝廷的恩德信义。一味占据险地驻守来保护自己,那是向敌人示弱的行径。"
"Now we should provide more opportunities for them to surrender and let them know the imperial grace and trustworthiness. If we only guard ourselves in some strategic place, it gives them an impression of our weakness."

乃聚敛吏民,治城郭,为守御之备。
于是便集聚官吏百姓,缮修城郭,做好防御准备。
Then he assembled officials and people to repair the city walls and prepare for defense.

遂发民逐贼,明赏罚,与要誓,其所得获,十以七赏。
而后发动民众追捕贼寇,明确赏罚的制度,商定公约盟誓,允许百姓获得他们缴获的十分之七的财物。
He encouraged people to catch brigands and stipulated clearly the conditions for reward and punishment. He took a pledge with people and promised them a reward seven-tenths of what they obtained from the plunderers.

百姓大悦,皆愿捕贼,多得妇女、财物。
百姓都非常高兴,愿意捕捉叛军,得到许多妇女、财物。
People were delighted and all were willing to catch plunderers in order to get more of their women, money and goods.

贼之失妻子者,皆还求降。
结果贼寇中失去妻子的,都回来请求投降。
The brigands who lost their wives returned and begged to surrender.

浑责其得他妇女,然后还其妻子,于是转相寇盗,党与离散。
郑浑责令他们捕捉同伙的妇女,然后还给他妻子。这一来叛军内部互相抢夺,梁兴的党羽被瓦解离散。
Zheng Hun then ordered them to catch other plunderers' women in exchange for their wives; therefore, they returned to rob women and steal things among themselves, and soon Liang Xing's accomplices were dispersed.

又遣吏民有恩信者,分布山谷告喻,出者相继,乃使诸县长吏各还本治以安集之。
郑浑又派有威信的官吏平民各到山谷中劝降,叛军跑出来投降的络绎不绝,于是让各县的官吏都回到原来管辖的地方安抚百姓。
Zheng Hun then sent officials and people with trustworthy and benevolent reputations into mountains and valleys to propagate his policies. The brigands came out to surrender one after another. Zheng Hun ordered the magistrates and officials to return to their own places, ensuring that people would gather together and settle down.

兴等惧,将余众聚廊城。
梁兴等人害怕了,率领余党聚集在廊城。
Liang Xing and his followers were frightened, and he led the rest of his throng of men into the town of Fucheng.

太祖使夏侯渊就助郡击之,浑率吏民前登,斩兴及其支党。
曹操派夏侯渊率军协助郑浑出击,郑浑带领民众首先登城,斩杀梁兴及其党羽。
Grand Ancestor ordered Xiahou Yuan to assist Zheng Hun's force an attack on the town, and Zheng Hun led his officials and people to charge in front. Finally they killed Liang Xing and wiped out his remnants.

又贼靳富等,胁将夏阳长、邵陵令并其吏民入硙山,浑复讨击破富等,获二县长吏,将其所略还。
又有靳富等人挟持夏阳县长、邵陵县令及两县官吏百姓进入硙山,郑浑再次带兵征剿,大破靳富,解救出两位县令及官吏,将靳富抢劫的东西归还二县。
Again the brigand chief Jin Fu and his followers seized the head of Xiayang and the magistrate of Shaoling, and forced officials and people into the Wei Mountain. Zheng Hun again led his army, defeated Jin Fu and his brigands, and rescued the two magistrates, their officials and people. They then returned what the brigands had looted.

及赵青龙者,杀左内史程休,浑闻,遣壮士就枭其首。
另有叫赵青龙的人,杀死了左内史程休,郑浑听说后,派遣壮士就地砍下了赵青龙的首级。
After Zhao Qinglong killed Cheng Xiu, prefect of Zuoneishi Prefecture, Zheng Hun heard of the news, and sent some strong men to cut off Zhao Qinglong's head.

前后归附四千余家,由是山贼皆平,民安产业。
前后归附郑浑的达到四千多家,从此山贼都被扫平,人民安居乐业。
Altogether, over four thousand families became followers of Zheng Hun. After this event, the mountain brigands and thieves were all subdued, and people lived and worked in peace.

转为上党太守。
郑浑调任上党郡太守。
Zheng Hun was transferred to be the prefect of Shangdang.

太祖征汉中,以浑为京兆尹。
曹操征伐汉中,任命郑浑为京兆尹。
When Grand Ancestor led a punitive expedition to Hanzhong, he appointed Zheng Hun Jingzhaoyin, prefect of the capital district.

浑以百姓新集,为制移居之法,使兼复者与单轻者相伍,温信者与孤老为比,勤稼穑,明禁令,以发奸者。
郑浑因为京兆地区的百姓都是新近迁来的,便制定了移居的法规,让宗支多的家族与单弱的人家同伍,让温和诚实的人家同孤寡老人为邻,奖励勤于农事的人,申明禁令,以揭发奸邪之人。
Zheng Hun reasoned that the citizens were all new immigrants, so he made the laws stipulating that families with many branches would live together with single or weak persons, and kind and honest people would live as neighbors to lonely old people. He encouraged people to work hard on farming, promulgated prohibitions and obliged people to report evil men.

由是民安于农,而盗贼止息。
从那以后,百姓安心务农,盗贼之患也被消除。
This allowed people to feel safe to engage in farm work, and as a result brigands and thieves disappeared.

及大军人汉中,运转军粮为最。
到大军进入汉中的时候,京兆地区转运的军粮最多。
After the army went into Hanzhong, he had the largest quantity of grain transported there.

又遣民田汉中,无逃亡者。
又派遣一部分人去汉中屯田,没有中途逃跑的。
He also dispatched laborers to open up fields in Hanzhong, and none of them escaped from the task.

太祖益嘉之,复入为丞相掾。
曹操更加赏识郑浑,让他再次入朝担任丞相掾。
Grand Ancestor thus thought even more highly of him and appointed him again as his own secretary.

文帝即位,为侍御史,加驸马都尉,迁阳平、沛郡二太守。
文帝即魏王位,郑浑担任侍御史,加官驸马都尉,先后升任阳平、沛郡太守。
When Emperor Wen ascended the throne, Zheng Hun was appointed vice minister under the imperial supervisor, and concurrently captain of the imperial guards. Later he was promoted to prefect of Yangping and Pei successively.

郡界下湿,患水涝,百姓饥乏。
这两个郡的地势低洼潮湿,水患严重,百姓穷困饥饿。
Because the two prefectures were in a low and wet land, people there suffered from flood, famine and poverty.

浑于萧、相二县界,兴陂遏,开稻田。
郑浑在萧、相两县的边界,修筑陂塘土堰,开垦稻田。
Zheng Hun suggested digging ponds, building dams and opening up rice fields along the borders of Xiao and Xiang counties.

郡人皆以为不便,浑日:"地势湾下,宜溉灌,终有鱼稻经久之利,此丰民之本也。"
郡中人都认为不应当这样,郑浑说:"地势低洼,灌溉很方便,最终会有收获鱼稻的长久利益,这是富民的根本所在。"
The people there all expressed negative opinions about his suggestion. However, Zheng Hun said, "The land is low but it is convenient for irrigation. In the long run, people will benefit from it in fishery and rice production. This is the foundation of a rich life for people."

遂躬率吏民,兴立功夫,一冬间皆成。
于是亲自率领官吏民众,兴建水利设施,仅用一个冬天就都建成了。
Then he himself led officials and people to work hard over a winter and accomplished the task.

比年大收,顷亩岁增,租入倍常,民赖其利,刻石颂之,号日郑陂。
以后连年大丰收,田地年年增多,租税的收入也比平时成倍的增长,百姓依靠这些设施获利不小,因此刻碑颂扬郑浑的功绩,把他兴建的塘堰称为郑陂。
The next year, there was a great harvest. Rice yieldings increased year after year, and the revenue increased greatly as well. People relied on the benefits brought on by the water conservancy project, so they inscribed Zheng Hun's deeds on the stone to sing praises of him and called the project Zheng Dam.

转为山阳、魏郡太守,其治放此。
后来调任山阳、魏郡太守,郑浑治理的措施同沛郡相仿。
Zheng Hun was successively appointed prefect of Shanyang and Wei, and there he worked in the similar way.

又以郡下百姓,苦乏材木,乃课树榆为篱,并益树五果;
又鉴于魏郡百姓有木材奇缺的苦恼,郑浑便督责他们种植榆树为篱笆,并且大量种植桃、李、杏、栗、枣五种果树;
Considering the lack of wood being used in the prefecture, he encouraged people to grow elms and five kinds of fruit trees.

榆皆成藩,五果丰实。
后来榆树都长成藩墙,五果丰实。
The elms all grew and were used as fences, and the five kinds of fruit trees yielded countless fruits.

入魏郡界,村落齐整如一,民得财足用饶。
进入魏郡地界,村落整齐划一,百姓都富裕丰饶。
Within the borders of Wei Prefecture, villages were built in good order, and people were wealthy with a bountiful supply for life.

明帝闻之,下诏称述,布告天下。
明帝听说后,下诏赞美,把他的事迹布告天下。
When Emperor Ming heard the story, he issued a decree to all people throughout the empire.

迁将作大匠。
升郑浑为将作大匠。
and promoted Zheng Hun to minister of construction.

浑清素在公,妻子不免于饥寒。
郑浑为官清廉朴素,妻子儿女竟常有饥寒之事。
Zheng Hun was devoted to his duty. He was honest and incorruptible, although his wife and children often suffered from hunger.

及卒,以子崇为郎中。
到郑浑病逝,朝廷任命他的儿子郑崇为郎中。
After he died, his son Zheng Chong was appointed to a court assistant.