华佗字元化,沛国谯人也,一名。
华佗字元化,沛国谯县人,又名勇。
Hua Tuo,also known as Hua Fu and Yuanhua,was a native of Qiao in Pei State.

游学徐土,兼通数经。
游学于徐州一带,精通多种经书。
In his youth,he once studied in the areas around Xuzhou City and had a thorough command of several classics.

沛相陈珪举孝廉,太尉黄琬辟,皆不就。
沛国相陈珪举荐他为孝廉,太尉黄琬征召他出仕,他都没有接受任命。
Chen Gui, a chief premier of Pei State, recommended Hua Tuo for an official position in accordance with the election system of filial and incorrupible men; and Huang Wan, a marshal, also appointed him as an official. However, he turned down both offers.

晓养性之术,时人以为年且百岁而貌有壮容。
他通晓养生之术,年纪将近百岁了却还是青壮年时的容貌,当时的人都以为他已登仙。
He was an expert in life preservation. His contemporaries thought he seemed to have been over a hundred years old, but he looked like a robust man.

又精方药,其疗疾,合汤不过数种,心解分剂,不复称量,煮熟便饮,语其节度,舍去辄愈。
又精通医方药物,替人治病,配药不过几种,心里十分清楚剂量大小,不必称量。煎好立即服用,交待下服用规则,病人吃完药就能迅速痊愈。
He had profound knowledge of pharmaceutics. When he treated diseases, he only prescribed a minimum number of different medicines, and he was able to administer the dosages without ever weighing them. This extraordinary efficiency allowed the patient to take the medicine as soon as it was decocted. He also took great care in aiding his patients, often telling them what cautions to take note of when taking the medication, and often times,when the medicine was taken as prescribed, they would have an immediate recovery.

若当灸,不过一两处,每处不过七八壮,病亦应除。
如当用灸,不过灼烧一二处穴位,每处不过七八个灸点,病也就治好了。
When moxibustion was needed in his treatment, he would only use it in one or two places. He would scorch these places about seven or eight times and the disease would be cured after that.

若当针,亦不过一两处,下针言"当引某许,若至,语人"。
如需施针,也不过扎一二处穴位,下针时说"针应当刺到某个地方,针已到,就出声告知"。
If acupuncture was required, he would only pierce one or two places. Before he used a needle, he would tell his patient,"The needle will stop at certain place. If my needle reaches the point, just tell me."

病者言"已到",应便拔针,病亦行差。
病人说"已到",应声拔针,病情也将很快好转。
As soon as the patient notified him that the needle had reached the place, he would immediately take it out and the disease would at once disappear.

若病结积在内,针药所不能及,当须割者,便饮其麻沸散,须电便如醉死无所知,因破取。
如果病积结在体内,针灸汤药之力不能达到,必须进行手术的,就饮用他的麻沸散,片刻间病人就像一场大醉毫无知觉,当即动刀破腹割取病灶。
When a disease was pent-up within the body, and if acupuncture and medicines could not reach it, then an operation would be conducted. The patient would drink his anesthetic medicine named mafeisan, and soon he would lie like a dead drunkard, completely unaware of his surroundings. Hua Tuo would then cut open his body to treat the issue.

病若在肠中,便断肠湔洗,缝腹膏摩,四五日差,不痛,人亦不自寤,一月之间,即平复矣。
病因若在肠子内,便切开肠子予以清洗,然后缝好伤口敷上膏药,四五日之后开始恢复,没有什么痛楚,病人自己也没什么感觉,一个月左右,就能平复如初了。
If the disease was in the intestines, he would usually cut off the part, wash the intestines, sew the belly back up, and smear ointment over the cut. After four or five days, the cut would not cause pain and the patient would not feel it either. Within a month, the cut would be healed.

故甘陵相夫人有娠六月,腹痛不安,佗视脉,日:"胎已死矣。"
原甘陵相的夫人怀孕已六个月,腹部疼痛不得安宁,华佗诊脉,说:"胎儿已死。"
The lady of the ex-premier of the Gangling State was in pregnancy for six months. She suffered a restless pain in her belly. When Hua Tuo felt her pulse, he was able to judge that the fetus was dead.

使人手摸知所在,在左则男,在右则女。
又让人用手触摸胎儿所在位置,在左边则是男胎,在右边则是女胎。
He asked someone to feel the stomach to see where the fetus was located, and said that if it was to the left, it was male and if it was to the right, it was a female.

人云"在左",于是为汤下之,果下男形,即愈。
摸胎的人说"在左",于是让孕妇服下汤药,果然打下一男胎,孕妇的病当即好了。
The fetus was on the left. Hua Tuo prescribed medicinal soup to abort the dead fetus, and the prediction had been correct - the unborn child was male. After the ejection of the fetus, the woman recovered immediately.

县吏尹世苦四支烦,口中干,不欲闻人声,小便不利。
县吏尹世苦于四肢疲劳,口中干渴,不愿听见人声,小便困难。
Yin Shi, a county official, suffered from exhaustive weakness in his four limbs, had difficulty urinating, and also experienced excessive thirst. He couldn't even stand the sounds of human voices.

佗日:"试作热食,得汗则愈;不汗,后三日死。"
华佗说:"试着做些热食吃下,能够出汗即可痊愈;倘若不能发汗,三天之后人就完了。"
Hua Tuo said to him,"Try to have some hot food. If it makes you sweat, you will have the hope of recuperation. If not, you will die in three days."

即作热食而不汗出,佗日:"藏气已绝于内,当啼泣而绝。"
当即做热食但吃后没有出汗,华佗说:"元气已在体内耗尽,当哭泣而死。"
Immediately, the man had some hot food, but there was no sweat. Hua Tuo then said,"The qi stored in your body has gone dry. You should cry for your death."

果如佗言。
后果如华佗所言。
This prediction happened just as Hua Tuo prophesied.

府吏兒寻、李延共止,俱头痛身热,所苦正同。
府吏兒寻、李延住在一起,都觉头痛和身体发烧,症状完全相同。
The government officers Er Xun and Li Yan, who lived together, both suffered from the same disease which gave them headaches and fever.

佗日:"寻当下之,延当发汗。"
华佗说:"兒寻应当下泻,李延应当发汗。"
Hua Tuo said,"For Er Xun, his fever should be brought down; and for Li Yan, he should sweat to restore his health."

或难其异,佗日:"寻外实,延内实,故治之宜殊。"
有人诘问为何二人病情相同而治法各异,华佗说:"兒寻外实,李延内实,所以治疗方法应有分别。"
Someone asked why he gave different treatments. Hua Tuo answered,"Er Xun was solid outside, while Li Yan was solid inside; therefore, they should receive different treatments."

即各与药,明旦并起。
随即给两人开不同的药,第二天两人就都能起床了。
He then prescribed different medicines for them, and they were both able to get up the next morning.

盐渎严昕与数人共候佗,适至,佗谓昕日:"君身中佳否?"
盐渎县的严昕与几个人一起等候华佗,华佗刚到,即问严昕说:"您身体好否?"
One day Yan Xin and several others of Yandu County waited for Hua Tuo together. When Hua Tuo arrived he asked Yan Xin,"Do you feel well?"

昕日:"自如常。"
严昕说:"自然跟平常一样。"
Yan Xin replied,"Normal as usual."

佗日:"君有急病见于面,莫多饮酒。"
华佗说:"您的脸上显示出患有急症,不要多喝酒。"
Hua Tuo said, "Judging from your look, you have attracted an acute disease. Do not drink much."

坐毕归,行数里,昕卒头眩堕车,人扶将还,载归家,中宿死。
严昕他们坐了一会告辞,走出几里地,严昕突然头晕从车上掉了下来,人们搀扶着他返回,用车送他到家,当天夜半时分就死了。
After sitting for a while, Yan Xin returned. During the way home, he suddenly felt dizzy and fell off the carriage. Men supported him back by the arm, and sent him home with a carriage. He later died in his sleep at midnight.

故督邮顿子献得病已差,诣佗视脉,日:"尚虚,未得复,勿为劳事,御内即死。
原督邮顿子献患病已差不多完全治好,去找华佗诊脉,华佗说:"还虚弱呢,尚未完全恢复,别干过于劳累的事,如和妻子同房就会死。
The ex-public security official Dun Zixian had already recovered from his disease and asked Hua Tuo to check his pulse. Hua Tuo told him,"You are still quite feeble and have not recovered yet. You should not engage in any exhaustive work. For instance, if you have sexual intercourse with your wife, you will die.

临死,当吐舌数寸。"
临死的时候,舌头会吐出数寸。"
When you die, your tongue will hang out several cun long."

其妻闻其病除,从百余里来省之,止宿交接,中间三日发病,一如佗言。
顿子献的妻子听说丈夫的病已根除,从百余里之外赶来探望他,当夜留宿行房,隔三天之后发病,结果完全像华佗预言的那样。
When his wife heard of his recovery, she came to see him from over a hundred li away. Against Hua Tuo's advice, they slept together and in three days, his disease recurred. He died just as Hua Tuo described.

督邮徐毅得病,佗往省之。
督邮徐毅得病,华佗前往探视。
Xu Yi, a public security official, contracted a disease, and Hua Tuo went to see him.

毅谓佗日:"昨使医曹吏刘租针胃管讫,便苦咳嗽,欲卧不安。"
徐毅对华佗说:"昨天让医官刘租用针刺胃管后,便苦于咳嗽不止,睡不安宁。"
Xu Yi told Hua Tuo,"Yesterday the military medical officer Liu Zu used a needle to pierce my stomach tube, and ever since I have been coughing so much that I am unable to sleep."

佗日:"刺不得胃管,误中肝也,食当日减,五日不救。"
华佗说:"针没刺到胃管,误刺了肝脏,您的饮食会日趋减少,五天之内就没救了。"
Hua Tuo replied,"He has not pierced your stomach tube but your liver by mistake. Your diet will be reduced day by day, and you will meet your death in five days."

遂如佗言。
后来果如华佗所言。
Events transpired as predicted.

东阳陈叔山小男二岁得疾,下利常先啼,日以赢困。
东阳县陈叔山的小男孩二岁得病,下泻时常先哭,日见消瘦无力。
The youngest son of Chen Shushan of Dongyang was only two years old and developed a disease. He often cried because he had diarrhea, and he became weaker daily.

问佗,佗日:"其母怀躯,阳气内养,乳中虚冷,儿得母寒,故令不时愈。"
请华佗诊病,华佗说:"他母亲怀他之时,阳气内养,乳中虚寒,这孩子得了母寒,所以使他不能及时获得健康的生长。"
Chen Shushan asked Hua Tuo for a diagnosis, and Hua Tuo told him,"When his mother was pregnant with him, the accumulated yang qi was pent-up in her body. This caused her milk to be cold, and the son absorbed his mother's cold. That is why he could not recover in time."

佗与四物女宛丸,十日即除。
华佗给他四物女宛丸,十天就把病治好了。
Hua Tuo then gave him niwan pills made of four ingredients, and in ten days the disease was cured.

彭城夫人夜之厕,虿整其手,呻呼无赖。
彭城夫人夜里去厕所,手被毒虫螫伤,痛得呻吟呼叫无可奈何。
When the lady of the prefect of Pengcheng went to the toilet at night, her hand was stung by a scorpion, and she groaned helplessly in pain.

佗令温汤近热,渍手其中,卒可得寐,但旁人数为易汤,汤令暖之,其且即愈。
华佗叫人把汤药烧到温热,夫人将手泡在药汤中,终于得以入睡,只是旁人反复给她换热汤,保持水温,第二天天明就好了。
Hua Tuo had hot medicinal water to be prepared for her to put her hand in, so that she could fall asleep. The water had to be changed for her several times in order to maintain its heat, and it was not until morning that her pain was relieved.

军吏梅平得病,除名还家,家居广陵,未至二百里,止亲人舍。
军吏梅平得病,被斥退回家,他家住广陵,离到家还有二百里路程时,在一个亲戚家过夜。
Mei Ping, a military officer, caught a disease and was dismissed from the army to return home. His family was in Guangling. On his way, two hundred li from his home, he was put up at his relative's house.

有顷,佗偶至主人许,主人令佗视平,佗谓平日:"君早见我,可不至此。
不久,华佗偶然来此人家里,主人求华佗诊视梅平,华佗对梅平说:"您要是早点见到我,病情不至于发展到这个程度。
Not long after that, Hua Tuo happened to visit the host, who asked Hua Tuo to give a diagnosis of Mei's disease. Hua Tuo said to Mei Ping,"If you saw me earlier, your disease would not have been so serious.

今疾已结,促去可得与家相见,五日卒。"
如今已是病入膏肓了,火速赶回去还来得及和家人相见,五天后就会死。"
Now the disease has reached its worst stage. If you hurry, you could still see your family, but you will die in five days."

应时归,如佗所刻。
梅平即时启程回家,他的死亡时间正如华佗预计的那样。
Mei Ping arrived home with enough time, and soon he died exactly as Hua Tuo had described.

佗行道,见一人病咽塞,嗜食而不得下,家人车载欲往就医。
华佗走在路上,见一人有吞食困难的病,想吃东西却难以下咽,其家属正拉着病人去找大夫。
Once a time when Hua Tuo was walking on his way, he saw a patient having difficulty in swallowing food. The patient had a strong desire to eat but could not keep food down. His family carried him on a cart to send him to a doctor.

伦闻其呻吟,驻车往视,语之日:"向来道边有卖饼家,蒜齑大酢,从取三升饮之,病自当去。"
华佗听见他的呻吟声,停车前去探视,对病人说:"过来的路边有卖饼人家,店里有蒜末大醋,买三升喝下去,此病自当没事。"
Hua Tuo heard his groans and stopped the cart to see the patient. He told him,"Just now I passed by a cake shop. Go there, buy some mashed garlic and three liters of vinegar. Drink them all, and the disease will disappear."

即如佗言,立吐蛇一枚,县车边,欲造佗。
病人当即按华佗的说法去做,立即吐出一条蛇,他们把蛇悬挂在车边,想去拜谢华佗。
The patient did as Hua Tuo told him, and immediately he vomited out a snake. He hanged it by the side of his cart and started on his way to visit Hua Tuo.

佗尚未还,小儿戏门前,逆见,自相谓日:"似逢我公,车边病是也。"
而华佗尚未回家,只有他家小孩在门前玩,迎面看见来人,自语道:"车边挂着蛇的病人,想必是遇见我父亲了。"
who had not yet returned. His children were playing in front of the house, and when they saw the man, they said to themselves," It seems that he has met our father, and the snake on the side of the cart proves it."

疾者前入坐,见佗北壁县此蛇辈约以十数。
那位病人进屋坐,见华佗房内北墙上悬挂着十几条这样的蛇。
When the patient entered the house and took a seat, he saw over a dozen of similar snakes hanging on the northern wall.

又有一郡守病,伦以为其人盛怒则差,乃多受其货而不加治,无何弃去,留书骂之。
又有一个郡守得病,华佗认为这个人只要怒气大发病情即可好转,于是接受他很多财物却不给诊治,不久之后不辞而别,还留下书信辱骂郡守。
A prefect caught a disease. Hua Tuo held that if he flew into a rage, he would recover. He started accepting many of his gifts but did not give him any treatment. Then one day, without any reason, he departed and left a note to curse him.

郡守果大怒,令人追提杀佗。
郡守果然大怒,令人去追杀华佗。
The prefect exploded into such a wrath that he ordered his men to pursue after and kill him.

郡守子知之,属使勿逐。
郡守的儿子知道个中奥妙,嘱咐手下人不得去追。
His son knew the reason of Hua Tuo's departure and told the men not to follow his father's orders.

守瞋患既甚,吐黑血数升而愈。
郡守恼怒之极,吐出了几升黑血之后病也就好了。
The prefect was so indignant that he vomited liters of black blood, and then his health was restored.

又有一士大夫不快,佗云:"君病深,当破腹取。
又有一个士大夫自感不适,华佗说:"您的病藏得很深,应当开腹取出病灶。
A scholar-official did not feel well. Hua Tuo said,"Your disease is serious, and an operation on your stomach is needed to eliminate it.

然君寿亦不过十年,病不能杀君,忍病十岁,寿俱当尽,不足故自列裂。"
不过您的寿命也不会超过十年了,此病不至于危及您的生命,忍病十年,病与寿命当同时完结,不值得为了治病而剖开肚腹了。"
However, you will only have a lifespan of ten more years in which the disease will not kill you. If you can bear the disease for ten years, your life will end with it at the same time. It is not worth having your belly cut open."

士大夫不耐痛痒,必欲除之。
士大夫不能忍受发病时的痛痒,下决心要去除病根。
The scholar-official could not bear the itch and pain, and was determined to get rid of it.

佗遂下手,所患寻差,十年竟死。
华佗于是为他动了手术,这人的病随即好转,十年后竟如华佗所言寿终正寝了。
Hua Tuo at once did the operation. The disease was soon cured, and after ten years he died as predicted.

广陵太守陈登得病,胸中烦懑,面赤不食。
广陵太守陈登得病,心中烦闷,面色发红而全无食欲。
Chen Deng, prefect of Guangling, contracted a disease. He felt depressed, was restless with a flushing face and had no appetite for food.

佗脉之日:"府君胃中有虫数升,欲成内疽,食腥物所为也。"
华佗诊脉说:"您的胃中有虫数升,将要成为你体内的毒疮,是吃腥物所致。"
Hua Tuo felt his pulse and said,"Your honor, there are some liters of worms in your stomach that cause stomach ulcers. It's because you have eaten too much smelling fish."

即作汤二升,先服一升,斯须尽服之。
随即做二升汤药,让陈登先服一升,一会再全部喝下。
Right away, he had two liters of a medicinal decoction prepared. The patient was instructed to drink one liter first, and then finish it all.

食顷,吐出三升许虫,赤头皆动,半身是生鱼脍也,所苦便愈。
服药后片刻之间,吐出三升多虫子,红头能动,半身还是生鱼肉,陈登的病也就痊愈了。
After he ingested the liquid, he vomited about three liters of worms. All of the worms had wriggling red heads, and their bodies stuck to raw fish chunks. The ailment the prefect suffered from disappeared at once.

佗日:"此病后三期当发,遇良医乃可济救。"
华佗说:"这种病三年后还当复发,遇上良医才能获救。"
Hua Tuo told him,"This disease will recur in three years. If you meet a good physician, you can be saved."

依期果发动,时佗不在,如言而死。
到期果然复发,当时华佗不在,陈登不治而死。
The disease recurred right as predicted, but because Hua Tuo was not there at that time, the prefect died.

太祖闻而召佗,伦常在左右。
曹操听说后征召华佗,让华佗常在自己左右。
Grand Ancestor heard about Hua Tuo and summoned him for service. Hua Tuo stayed at the Grand Ancestor's side.

太祖苦头风,每发,心乱目眩,佗针鬲,随手而差。
曹操患有头痛病,每当发病之时,即心烦意乱而目眩神迷,华佗施针于膈俞穴,往往应手即好。
He suffered from a head wind disease, and often felt very upset and dizzy each time it occurred. Hua Tuo pierced his diaphragm with acupuncture, and the pain disappeared right away.

李将军妻病甚,呼佗视脉,日:"伤娠而胎不去。"
李将军妻子病情危重,请华佗诊脉,华佗说:"伤了孕但死胎仍在。"
General Li's wife had a serious illness, and he summoned Hua Tuo to diagnose her through monitoring her pulse. Hua Tuo said, "She was injured during pregnancy but the fetus still remains in her womb."

将军言:"间实伤娠,胎已去矣。"
将军说:"期间确实伤了孕,胎儿已经没了。"
The general told him,"She was indeed injured during pregnancy but the baby was born."

佗日:"案脉,胎未去也。"
华佗说:"根据脉象,胎儿没掉。"
Hua Tuo retorted," Her pulse indicates that the fetus is still inside."

将军以为不然。
将军认为并非如此。
The general did not agree with him.

佗舍去,妇稍小差。
华佗离去后,病妇有所好转。
Hua Tuo left, and the lady felt a little better.

百余日复动,更呼佗,佗日:"此脉故事有胎。
百余天后再度复发,又叫华佗来看,华佗说:"脉象中明明跟上次一样显示胎在腹中。
Over a hundred days passed, the lady suffered pain again, and once more they invited Hua Tuo to their home. Hua Tuo said,"This pulse reads that the fetus is still in the womb, as I stated before.

前当生两儿,一儿先出,血出甚多,后儿不及生。
以前应生下两个小孩,一胎儿先生,因出血太多,后一胎儿没能及时生下。
The lady should have given birth to two sons. One son came out first, but because she bled profusely then, the second son was not born in time.

母不自觉,旁人亦不寤,不复迎,遂不得生。
孕妇本人没有感觉,旁人也不懂得,没继续接生,于是这个胎儿就没能生下来。
The mother was not aware of it and the others on her side did not realize it either. They did not prepare for another birth, so the son did not have the chance to be born.

胎死,血脉不复归,必燥著母脊,故使多脊痛。
胎儿已死,血脉不再营养胎儿,使胎儿枯死贴连母背,所以使得孕妇后背疼痛。
Since the fetus was dead, the blood could not flow back. It must have hurt the mother's backbone and that is why her backbone is in pain.

今当与汤,并针一处,此死胎必出。"
今当给予汤药,并且针扎一处穴道,这个死胎一定出来。"
Now, drink this medicinal soup, receive acupuncture, and the dead fetus will be ejected."

汤针既加,妇痛急如欲生 者。
汤药喝过针也扎完,孕妇剧痛得好像快要生小孩一样。
After the medicinal decoction and acupuncture, the lady started experiencing great pain as if she were going into labor.

佗日:"此死胎久枯,不能自出,宜使人探之。"
华佗说:"这个死胎枯萎的时间太长,不能自行出来,应请旁人助产。"
Hua Tuo said,"The dead fetus has withered for so long that it can not come out itself. It is better to have someone drag it out."

果得一死男,手足完具,色黑,长可尺所。
果然生下一个死了的男胎,手脚齐全,但肤色发黑,长一尺左右。
As a result,a dead male baby was pulled out, who, about one chi or so in length, had a blackened body and four complete limbs.

佗之绝技,凡此类也。
华佗的绝妙医术,大抵都如上面所说。
Hua Tuo's techniques manifested themselves in similar cases.

然本作士人,以医见业,意常自悔。
然而他原本是士人,把医术作为自己的职业,内心常常后悔。
Although he was at first a scholar, he later was referred to as a professional physician.

后太祖亲理,得病笃重,使佗专视。
后来曹操亲自处理朝政,得病愈是严重,让华佗专门诊治。
Later Grand Ancestor took control of imperial administration, and when he caught a serious disease, he summoned Hua Tuo as his personal physician.

佗日:"此近难济,恒事攻治,可延岁月。"
华佗说:"这种病短时间内很难治愈,应持续不停地治疗,可以延寿。"
Hua Tuo told him,"The disease is difficult to eliminate in a short time. A long-term treatment plan will be beneficial in order to prolong your life."

佗久远家思归,因日:"当得家书方,欲暂还耳。"
华佗长时间离家难免思乡心切,因此说:"应当去家里整出一个治疗偏方才好,我打算回家一小段时间。"
Hua Tuo was nostalgic for his family because he had been away from home for a long time so he told the Grand Ancestor,"I must go home in order to study up on a special prescription for the treatment of your disease. Therefore, I wish to have a short stay at home."

到家,辞以妻病,数乞期不反。
他回家之后,借口老妻有病多次请求延长假期不愿返回。
After he arrived home, he pleaded several times to postpone his return using the excuse of his wife's illness.

太祖累书呼,又敕郡县发遣。
曹操屡次写信催他,又命郡县官吏敦促。
Grand Ancestor wrote to him several times to summon him, and ordered the prefecture and county officials to urge him to return.

佗恃能厌食事,犹不上道。
华佗仗着自己艺有专长讨厌受官府役使,仍然不肯上路。
Hua Tuo, relying on his own techniques, hated to be a servant of government officials and was unwilling to return.

太祖大怒,使人往检。
曹操大怒,派人前往华佗家里查看。
Grand Ancestor was so enraged that he dispatched his men to inspect Hua Tuo's situation.

若妻信病,赐小豆四十斛,宽假限日;若其虚诈,便收送之。
如果华佗的妻子确实有病,赐给他小豆四十斛,并宽限其假期约定返回时间;如果华佗所言属于弄虚作假,就要将他收捕押送来京。
If his wife was really ill, they would give him forty hu of small beans and extend his time limit to return. If what he said was false, they were ordered to arrest him and bring him back under escort.

于是传付许狱,考验首服。
结果华佗被传车押入许都监狱,经拷问自认有罪。
As a result, Hua Tuo was escorted back in a prison cart and sent to prison in Xu, the capital. After extensive interrogation and torture, Hua Tuo admitted to his crime.

荀或请日:"佗术实工,人命所县。宜含宥之。"
荀彧为华佗求情说:"华佗医术实在高明,关系到解救人命。应当宽容赦免他。"
Xun Yu pleaded with Grand Ancestor for his leniency on Hua Tuo's behalf by saying,"Hua Tuo's medical techniques were indeed brilliant, and they can save people's lives. For this reason, it is justifiable to forgive him."

太祖曰:"不忧,天下当无此鼠辈邪?"
曹操说:"不用担心,天下难道就没有像华佗这样的小人了吗?"
Grand Ancestor said,"Do not worry about that. Is there not any inferior man like Hua Tuo throughout the country?"

遂考竟佗。
于是将华佗拷打至死。
Then Hua Tuo was beaten to death.

佗临死,出一卷书与狱吏,日:"此可以活人。"
华佗临死,拿出一卷书递给看管狱吏,说:"这本书有治病救人的法门。"
Before his death, Hua Tuo gave a book to the prison officer, saying,"This book can save people's lives."

吏畏法不受,佗亦不强,索火烧之。
狱吏害怕受到法律制裁而不敢接受,华佗也不勉强,取火把书烧了。
The officer would not accept it for fear of violating the criminal law, so Hua Tuo did not press it on him but instead asked for fire and burnt the book.

佗死后,太祖头风未除。
华佗死后,曹操的头痛病没有根除。
After Hua Tuo's death, Grand Ancestor's head wind disease still persisted.

太祖日:"佗能愈此。小人养吾病,欲以自重,然吾不杀此子,亦终当不为我断此根原耳。"
曹操说:"华佗能治好我这个毛病。那个小人故意拖延治疗我的病痛,想借此抬高自己的身价罢了,然而就算我不杀这小子,他最终也不会给我去除病根的。"
He complained,"Hua Tuo could have cured it, but the inferior man wouldn't cure my disease for his own self-esteem. However, even if I had not killed him, he wouldn't have cured the disease for me."

及后爱子仓舒病困,太祖叹日:"吾悔杀华佗,令此儿强死也。"
及至后来爱子仓舒病重,曹操叹息道:"我后悔杀了华佗,使我的爱子枉死。"
Later in life, his beloved son Cangshu caught a serious disease. Grand Ancestor sighed,"I regret that I have killed Hua Tuo. If he had still been alive, my son would not have died from lack of treatment."

初,军吏李成苦咳嗽,昼夜不寐,时吐脓血,以问佗。
起初,军中小吏李成患咳嗽不止之病,昼夜难以安枕,不时口吐脓血,他求华佗诊断。
At first, Li Cheng, a military officer, suffered from a continuous cough, and could not fall asleep all day or night. From time to time, he vomited pus and blood, so he went to see Hua Tuo for treatment.

佗言:"君病肠臃,咳之所吐,非从肺来也。
华佗说:"您得了肠臃病,您咳吐出来的东西,不是出自肺部。
Hua Tuo said,"Your disease is an intestinal abscess, and what you vomited in coughs did not come from your lungs.

与君散两钱,当吐二升余脓血讫,快自养,一月可小起,好自将爱,一年便健。
给您开两钱散剂,将吐出二升左右的脓血就止住了,赶紧调养,一个月就可稍稍起床,然后小心保重,一年就能恢复健康。
I will give you two qian of the medicinal powder. After you take it, you will vomit out two liters of pus and blood, and then the vomiting will stop. You should lose no time to recuperate with care. In a month you will be able to get up for a short time. If you take good care of yourself, you can become strong in a year.

十八岁当一小发,服此散,亦行复差。
十八年后会小有复发,服用此药,也就能再次好转。
However, the disease will recur mildly in eighteen years. Take this medicinal powder, and your health will recover quickly.

若不得此药,故当死。"
如果不能得到此药,只怕就逃不过一死了。"
If you can not take this medicine, you will die as a result."

复与两钱散。
于是又给李成两钱散剂。
He again gave him two qian of the medicinal powder.

成得药,去五六岁,亲中人有病如成者,谓成日:"卿今强健,我欲死,何忍无急去药以待不祥?先持贷我,我差,为卿从华佗更索。"
李成拿到药,之后过了五六年,他的亲戚中有人得了跟他一样的病,那人对李成说:"你现在身体强壮,我快要死了,你何必没有急症却守着那些药等着不吉利的事情到来?先把药借我,等我病好,替你到华佗那儿另要就是。"
Li Cheng accepted the medicine, but after five or six years, one of his relatives contracted the same disease. He said to Li Cheng, "You are now strong and healthy, but I am going to die. How can you keep the medicine and wait for the disease to kill me? When I recover, I will ask Hua Tuo to give you the medicine once more."

成与之。
李成把药给了这个亲戚。
Li Cheng then gave it to him.

已故到谯,适值佗见收匆匆,不忍从求。
后因事到谯县,正值华佗被收押,仓猝间不忍心追着华佗要药。
Later he went to Qiao. But at that moment it just so happened that Hua Tuo was being taken into custody hurriedly, so he didn't have the heart to ask for the medicine.

后十八岁,成病竟发,无药可服,以至于死。
十八年之后,李成的病终于发作,无药可服,直至病死。
Eighteen years later, Li Cheng's disease returned unexpectedly, and because there was no medicine for treatment, he died.

广陵吴普、彭城樊阿皆从佗学。
广陵县人吴普、彭城县人樊阿都随华佗学医。
Wu Pu of Guangling and Fan Ah of Pengcheng both learned medicine from Hua Tuo.

普依准佗治,多所全济。
吴普严格遵循华佗的方法治病,不少人因为他的医术而得以痊愈。
Wu Pu followed Hua Tuo's methods of treatment, methods in which many people were able to recover from diseases.

佗语普日:"人体欲得劳动,但不当使极尔。
华佗对吴普说:"人体需要劳动,但不能劳累过度罢了。
Hua Tuo said to Wu Pu,"A man's body needs physical labor, but it should not be exhausted.

动摇则谷气得消,血脉流通,病不得生,譬犹户枢不朽是也。
人体运动则胃气得以消除,血脉通畅,不会得病,就好像门枢经常活动而不易腐烂的道理一样。
Physical movement of a body can consume the qi of grain. Thus blood can flow smoothly, and a man will not develop any disease, just as the door pivot does not rot due to the frequent movement.

是以古之仙者为导引之事,熊颈鸱顾,引挽腰体,动诸关节,以求难老。
因此古代学仙的人练习导引,模仿熊攀枝悬挂的动作,模仿鸱鸟回顾的样子,曲伸肢体,活动各个关节,从而力保青春不老。
Ancient immortals practiced some guiding and pulling exercises. By imitating a bear climbing trees and hanging on branches, and an owl turning its head, they should stretch and bend their body, and move their joints to seek ways against senility.

吾有一术,名五禽之戏,一日虎,二日鹿,三日熊,四日猿,五日鸟,亦以除疾,并利蹄足,以当导引。
我摸索了一套健身强体之术,名叫五禽戏,其一为虎戏,其二为鹿戏,其三为熊戏,其四为猿戏,其五为鸟戏,也可以用来去病,并且利于强健腿脚,以此当作导引。
I have one craft entitled the Five Animal Frolics: The first is a tiger, the second is a deer, the third a bear, the fourth a chimpanzee, and the fifth a bird. They can also cure diseases, and at the same time benefit the legs and feet. They are similar to the guiding and pulling exercises.

体中不快,起作一禽之戏,沾满汗出,因上著粉,身体轻便,腹中欲食。"
如身体感到不适,站身做做一禽之戏,全身微微出汗,然后敷上粉,身体得以轻捷,食欲也因此大增。"
If you do not feel well in the body, stand up to exercise in just one of the animal frolic poses, work up a sweat, then cover the body with powder. The whole body will feel light, and you will have the desire to eat."

普施行之,年九十余,耳目聪明,齿牙完坚。
吴普遵照练习,年纪九十余岁时,还耳聪目明,牙齿完整坚固。
Wu Pu practiced it. He still had bright eyes and sharp ears, and kept a mouthful of solid, healthy teeth when he was over 90.

阿善针术。
樊阿擅长扎针。
Fan Ah was an expert of acupuncture.

凡医咸言背及胸藏之间不可妄针,针之不过四分,而阿针背人一二寸,巨阙胸藏针下五六寸,而病辄皆瘳。
大凡行医者都说后背和前胸不能轻易施针,即使施针也深不过四分,而樊阿在后背施针深入一二寸,而在肚脐以上的巨阙等危险要穴更敢下针深达五六寸,施针后病人往往得以痊愈。
Usually the medical book said:"One must be discreet in order to pierce the acupoints on the back and chest. The maximum depth is usually four fen." Fan Ah was able to pierce one to two cun on the back, and five to six cun in depth on the critical acupoints of Juque, as well as points above the navel. Usually the patients would make a full recovery.

阿从佗求可服食益于人者,佗授以漆叶青黏散。
樊阿向华佗求问利于人体健康的服用型丹药秘方,华佗传授他炼制漆叶青黏散。
Fan Ah pleaded with Hua Tuo for the secret recipe of the dosages that were beneficial to health. Hua Tuo taught him how to refine the lacquer-leaf and qingnian powder.

漆叶屑一升,青黏屑十四两,以是为率,言久服去三虫,利五藏,轻体,使人头不白。
漆叶碎屑一升,青黏碎屑十四两,以此为配方标准,说坚持服用能除去三虫,利于五脏六腑,且身轻体健,使人头发不白。
a liter of lacquer-leaf scraps, plus fourteen liang scraps of qingnian was the standard formula. He said the constant taking of the powder would eliminate three kinds of worms, and, at the same time, be beneficial to the internal organs. Takers would feel light and strong, and they would maintain their youth.

阿从其言,寿百余岁。
樊阿听从华佗的指导,活到一百余岁。
Fan Ah followed Hua Tuo's instruction, and lived until he was over a hundred years old.

漆叶处所而有,青黏生于丰、沛、彭城及朝歌云。
漆叶到处都有,青黏生长在丰县、沛县、彭城及朝歌等地。
Lacquer leaves were found everywhere and qingnian was said to grow in places such as Feng, Pei, Pengcheng and Chaoge.