张嶷字伯岐，巴郡南充国人也。
张嶷字伯岐，巴郡南充国人。
Zhang Yi, also known as Boqi, was a native of Nanchong State of Ba Prefecture.

弱冠为县功曹。
二十岁时任县里的功曹。
who was appointed deputy magistrate at 20.

先主定蜀之际，山寇攻县，县长捐家逃亡，嶷冒白刃，携负夫人，夫人得免。
刘备平定益州的时候，山寇攻打南充国，县长弃家而逃，张嶷冒着敌人的刀剑，带着县长夫人出逃，夫人得以免祸。
At the time when Founding Master was taking over Yi Province, the mountain bandits attacked the county seat, and the magistrate left his family and fled for his own life. Zhang Yi braved the enemy’s broad knives, and protected the magistrate’s wife during their escape, thus ensuing his wife’s survival.

由是显名，州召为从事。
张嶷从此出名，州里征召他为从事。
Because of this event, he became well-known, and the prefect summoned him as his subordinate.

时郡内士人龚禄、姚伷位二千石，当世有声名，皆与嶷友善。
当时巴郡的士人龚禄、姚伷都是官位二千石的大官，在社会上很有声望，都与张嶷友好。
At that time, Gong Lu and Yao Zhou were well-known in the prefecture because they were all officials with the emoluments of two thousand dan. Both had friendly relations with Zhang Yi.

建兴五年，丞相亮北住汉中，广汉、绵竹山贼张慕等钞盗军资，劫略吏民，嶷以都尉将兵讨之。
建兴五年，丞相诸葛亮北行驻扎在汉中郡，广汉、绵竹的山贼张慕等人劫掠军用物资，抢劫官吏百姓，张嶷以都尉的身份带兵讨伐他们。
In the fifth year of the Jianxing Period, Prime Minister Zhuge Liang was stationed in Hanzhong in the north, and the mountain bandits of Guanghan and Mianzhu, headed by Zhang Mu, intercepted the military supplies, and robbed the officials and citizens. Zhang Yi, acting as the garrison commander, headed the troops to suppress them.

嶷度其鸟散，难以战禽，乃诈与和亲，克期置酒。
张嶷考虑到山贼们惯于如鸟飞散，难以通过作战擒获他们，于是佯装与山贼和亲，约定日期设宴相会。
He reckoned that the bandits would scatter as fast as birds, but it was difficult to fight against and catch them. Because of this he schemed a marriage that was arranged for harmony between them, and he had a banquet prepared at a fixed date.

酒酣，嶷身率左右，因斩慕等五十余级，渠帅悉殄。
等到山贼喝到尽兴畅快之际，张嶷亲率将士冲入座中，就在宴席斩下了张慕等五十几人的首级，山贼头目被一网打尽。
At the banquet, when all the bandit guests were drunk, Zhang Yi and his soldiers caught and beheaded over fifty of them. All the bandit chiefs and leaders were killed.

寻其余类，旬日清泰。
追歼山贼余部，十天之内这一带便清静平安了。
and the rest of the bandits were chased after and eliminated within ten days.

后得疾病困笃，家素贫匮，广汉太守蜀郡何祗，名为通厚，嶷宿与疏阔，乃自舆诣祗，托以治疾。
后曾患病十分沉重，而他家素来穷寒困乏，蜀郡人何祗时任广汉太守，有豁达宽厚的名声，张嶷之前跟他素昧平生，竟自己坐车去见何祗，拜托他为自己治病。
When Zhang Yi later contracted a serious disease, his family was in dire poverty. He Zhi of Shu Prefecture, prefect of Guanghan, was known for his honesty and generosity. Zhang Yi had never had any contact with him. He took a carriage, arrived at He Zhi’s house, and asked for his help in treating his disease.

祗倾财医疗，数年除愈。
何祗倾尽自己的财力为他治疗，几年后张嶷的疾病得到根治。
He Zhi spent all his money on treatment for Zhang Yi’s disease, and Zhang Yi recovered several years later. 

其党道信义皆此类也。
他对道义的坚守和信赖就大多与此类似。
This became one of the examples for his understanding of friendship, righteousness and trust.

拜为牙门将，属马忠，北讨汶山叛羌，南平四郡蛮夷，辄有筹画战克之功。
被任命为牙门将，归属马忠统领，北上讨伐汶山郡的羌人叛乱，往南平定四郡蛮夷，张嶷都常有出谋划策，摧敌陷阵的功劳。
He was appointed tooth-gate general under Ma Zhong. During the conquest of the rebellious Qiang tribes of Wenshan in the north and the suppression of the Man and Yi tribes of the four prefectures in the south, he established his accomplishments in military schemes and operations.

十四年，武都氐王苻健请降，遣将军张尉往迎，过期不到，大将军蒋琬深以为念。
建兴十四年，武都氐王苻健请求归降，派将军张尉前去迎接，但过了约定的日期人还没到，大将军蒋琬为此深为担忧。
In the fourteenth year, Fu Jian, king of the Di tribes in Wudu pleaded to surrender. General Zhang Wei was dispatched to meet him but he did not appear at the appointed time. Great General Jiang Wan was very much worried about it.

嶷平之曰：“苻健求附款至，必无他变，素闻健弟狡黠，又夷狄不能同功，将有乖离，是以稽留耳。”
张嶷评估说：“苻健请求归附的心志很真诚，一定不会发生意外，但一贯听说苻健的弟弟很狡诈，而且胡人不懂得共享功劳，难免有所背离，所以才耽延些时日罢了。”
but Zhang Yi estimated that, “Fu Jian is sincere in submission and there is certainly no change. I have heard that his younger brother is cunning. And minority people cannot share the benefits. They two may disagree with each other, therefore, he has been delayed.”

数日，问至，健弟果将四百户就魏，独健来从。
过了几天，消息传来，苻健的弟弟果然带着四百户人家投奔了魏国，只有苻健照原定计划归降。
Several days later, the news came that Fu Jian’s younger brother really led four hundred families to join the Wei Empire, and Fu Jian came alone to surrender.

初，越巂郡自丞相亮讨高定之后，叟夷数反，杀太守龚禄、焦璜，是后太守不敢之郡，只住安定县，去郡八百余里，其郡徒有名而已。
当初，越巂郡自从丞相诸葛亮讨伐高定之后，叟夷多次反叛，前后杀了太守龚禄、焦璜，从此以后太守不敢到郡中就任，只住在安定县，距郡治所在地达八百余里，该郡徒有其名而已。
At the beginning, after Prime Minister Zhuge Liang suppressed the rebellion in Gaoding, the Sou and Yi tribes in Yuexi Prefecture rebelled several times. They killed Prefects Gong Lu and Jiao Huang, and the subsequent prefects did not dare to live in the prefectural seat. Instead they only chose to reside in Anding County, over eight hundred li away. As a result, the prefecture only existed in name.

时论欲复旧郡，除嶷为越巂太守。
当时的议论主张要恢复对这个郡的实际管辖，于是任命张嶷为越巂郡太守。
When some people suggested the resumption of the old prefecture, Zhang Yi was appointed prefect of Yuexi.

嶷将所领往之郡，诱以恩信，蛮夷皆服，颇来降附。
张嶷带领属下人等前往越巂郡，以恩惠和信义来开导他们，蛮夷都很信服，来归降的人不在少数。
He led his subordinates to the prefecture, and attracted the barbarous tribes with trust and favors. They all became submissive, and some even joined Zhang Yi’s forces.

北徼捉马最骁劲，不承节度，嶷乃往讨，生缚其帅魏狼，又解纵告喻，使招怀余类。
北部边境的捉马族人最是骁勇劲健，不受管制调度，张嶷便前去征讨，活捉了他们的首领魏狼，又将他释放，晓谕他回去后招抚其他族人。
The horse-catching tribes in the northern border areas were most valiant and belligerent, and did not submit themselves to the control. Zhang Yi led his forces in the suppression. He caught their chief Wei Lang alive, but set him free and told him to persuade other tribes to submit themselves.

表拜狼为邑侯，种落三千余户皆安土供职。
张嶷表请封魏狼为邑侯，这样该部落的三千多户都安守本土而能尽心于自己的职责。
Wei Lang was bestowed on Marquis of Yi, and the over three thousand families of his tribe were spared their lives in order to be devoted to their professions.

诸种闻之，多渐降服，嶷以功赐爵关内侯。
其他部落听说这件事，也大多渐次降服了，张嶷因功被赐爵关内侯。
When other tribes heard about this, most of them gradually submitted themselves as well, thus Zhang Yi was bestowed on Marquis of Guannei as a reward for his achievements.

苏祁邑君冬逢、逢弟隗渠等，已降复反。
苏祁邑君冬逢、冬逢的弟弟隗渠等人，投降后又反。Dongfeng, the chief of Suqi Town, along with his younger brother Kui Qu and others rebelled again after their surrender. 

嶷诛逢。
张嶷杀了冬逢。
Zhang Yi killed Jun Dongfeng.

逢妻，旄牛王女，嶷以计原之。
冬逢的妻子是旄牛王的女儿，张嶷用计宽免了她。
His wife was the daughter of the chieftain of the Maoniu tribes, and so Zhang Yi pardoned her with a trick. 

而渠逃入西徼。
而隗渠则逃入西部的边境。
Kui Qu fled into the western border areas.

渠刚猛捷悍，为诸种深所畏惮，遣所亲二人诈降嶷，实取消息。
隗渠刚强勇猛而敏捷彪悍，各部族都很惧怕他，他派了两个亲信来向张嶷诈降，实际是要刺探消息。
where he was unyielding and ferocious, and because of this he was awed and feared by other tribes. He sent two close friends to Zhang Yi, pretending to surrender, but in reality they were detectives.

嶷觉之，许以重赏，使为反间，二人遂合谋杀渠。
张嶷察觉后，许诺给予这两人重赏，让他们充当了自己的间谍，这两人于是合谋杀了隗渠。
Zhang Yi discovered this, promised a wealthy reward, and sent them back with a discord-sowing stratagem. Afterwards the two planned to kill Kui Qu.

渠死，诸种皆安。
隗渠一死，各个部落便都得以安定。
and the death of Kui Qu brought peace to all the tribes.

又斯都耆帅李求承，昔手杀龚禄，嶷求募捕得，数其宿恶而诛之。
此外又有斯都族头领李求承，从前就是他亲手杀了原越巂郡太守龚禄，张嶷招募人抓住了他，历数他前后的罪恶然后杀了他。
In addition to this, the old chieftain of the Sidu tribes, Li Qiucheng, once killed Gong Lu by hand. Zhang Yi recruited men to catch him, and after having counted the evils he had done, he killed him.

始嶷以郡郭宇颓坏，更筑小坞。
最初张嶷因城郭屋宇已倾倒崩坏，另行修建了一座小城堡。
At the beginning of his office term, because of the collapse of the old city walls and houses, Zhang Yi constructed another small town for administration.

在官三年，徙还故郡，缮治城郭，夷种男女莫不致力。
在任三年之后，迁回原来的郡城，将城郭修缮一新，当地夷人无论男女没有谁不来出力的。
After three years, he moved back to the old city, reconstructed the city walls and houses without any assistance from the men and women of the minority tribes.

定莋、台登、卑水三县去郡三百余里，旧出盐铁及漆，而夷徼久自固食。
定莋、台登、卑水三县离郡治所在地达三百余里，过去出产盐、铁和漆，而边疆的蛮夷长期占有获取其利。
The three counties of Dingzuo, Taideng and Beishui were over three hundred li away from the prefectural seat. Salt, iron and lacquer were produced there in the old times, and the Yi tribes in the border areas had long controlled them for their own benefits.

嶷率所领夺取，署长吏焉。
张嶷率领他的部下夺了过来，在那里设置官署加以管理。
Zhang Yi led his army to take them over, and he then established an office there for management.

嶷之到定莋，定莋率豪狼岑，槃木王舅，甚为蛮夷所信任，忿嶷自侵，不自来诣。
张嶷到定莋，定莋的蛮夷首领狼岑和槃木王舅，都很受蛮夷信任，他们对张嶷到定莋侵夺自己的利益非常不满，不肯自动来见张嶷。
When Zhang Yi arrived at Dingzuo, Langcen and Panmu Wangju, deeply-trusted chieftains of the local tribes there, were quite resentful because he seized their interests. They would not come to see Zhang Yi themselves.

嶷使壮士数十直往收致，挞而杀之，持尸还种，厚加赏赐，喻以狼岑之恶，且曰：“无得妄动，动即殄矣！”
张嶷派几十个壮士径直把他俩抓来，鞭打之后杀了，把尸体送还给他们的部落，对其部落却给予丰厚赏赐，并晓谕狼岑的罪恶，同时警告大家：“不要试图轻举妄动，作乱就将被消灭啊！”
Zhang Yi then sent many warriors to catch the two, and had them whipped and killed. He then returned their corpses to their tribes, but in contrast to this, he also rewarded their tribes generously, all while announcing the evils of Langcen. He warned them, “Do not act rashly, or you will die.”

种类咸面缚谢过。
全部落的人都反绑双手前来认罪。
The tribesmen all bound themselves in repentance.

嶷杀牛飨宴，重申恩信，遂获盐铁，器用周赡。
张嶷杀牛设宴，席间向蛮夷重申恩信，于是获得了盐铁，器具食用充足完备。
Zhang Yi killed a cow to treat them with a banquet, and reiterated the favors and trust offered. He obtained salt and iron, and had an ample supply for manufacturing tools and vessels.

汉嘉郡界旄牛夷种类四千余户，其率狼路欲为姑婿冬逢报怨，遣叔父离将逢众相度形势。
汉嘉郡边界上的旄牛部族有四千多户，头领狼路试图替他的姑父冬逢报仇，就派他的叔父离带着冬逢的部属去观察估量形势。
On the border areas of the Hanjia Prefecture lived the Maoniu tribes of over four thousand households, and their chieftain Langlu wanted to revenge his aunt’s husband Dongfeng. He sent his Uncle Li to head Dongfeng’s tribesmen for a reconnaissance.

嶷逆遣亲近赍牛酒劳赐，又令离逆逢妻宣畅意旨。
张嶷派自己的亲近人员送牛和酒来犒劳赏赐离的人，又让离去见冬逢的妻子以阐发张嶷的意图。
Zhang Yi sent his close subordinates to treat Li and his men with beef and wine, and also to allow Li to see his sister for an explanation of Zhang Yi’s intention.

离既受赐，并见其姊，姊弟欢悦，悉率所领将诣嶷，嶷厚加赏待，遣还。旄牛由是辄不为患。
离既接受了赏赐，又见到了姐姐，姐弟欢喜，便全都率领各自的人众来见张嶷，张嶷给予丰厚的赏赐和款待，让他们回去。旄牛族从此不再为患。
Li accepted the rewards, and saw his elder sister. Both the sister and brother were pleased, and then led their people to see Zhang Yi. Zhang Yi treated them generously, rewarded them abundantly, and sent them back. Since then, the Maoniu tribes did not provoke any trouble.

郡有旧道，经旄牛中至成都，既平且近；自旄牛绝道，已百余年，更由安上，既险且远。
郡中过去有条古道，经过旄牛族居住的地方直到成都，既平坦路途又短；自从旄牛族人阻绝道路以来，这条路不能通行已有一百余年了，改从安上经过，既险又远。
There was an ancient road in the prefecture, which was level and straight, and led from the living areas of the Maoniu tribes to Chengdu. It had been over a hundred years since the Maoniu tribes blocked the road. The route to Chengdu had to be changed through Anshang, and it was distant and risky.

嶷遣左右赍货币赐路，重令路姑喻意，路乃率兄弟妻子悉诣嶷，嶷与盟誓，开通旧道，千里肃清，复古亭驿。
张嶷派左右带着财物赐给狼路，特别让狼路的姑姑传达自己的意思，狼路于是率领兄弟和妻儿来见张嶷，张嶷与他结盟立誓，开通了旧道，千里之间一路清平，古老的邮亭驿站也都得以恢复。
Zhang Yi sent his subordinates to reward Langlu with money and goods. Again he asked Langlu’s aunt to explain the purpose. Langlu headed his brothers, wives and children all to visit Zhang Yi. Zhang Yi swore with him for an alliance, opened up the ancient road, cleared the way for a thousand li and restored the ancient post stations.

奏封路为旄牛㽙毗王，遣使将路朝贡。
后主于是加嶷抚戎将军，领郡如故。张嶷奏请封狼路为旄牛㽙毗王，派使节带狼路去成都朝见进贡。后主刘禅于是给张嶷加官抚戎将军，仍兼郡太守。
Afterwards, he sent a memorial to request a conferment on Langlu as Goupí King of the Maoniu tribes. And Langlu was led by an envoy to present his respect and tributes before Later Master. Later Master promoted Zhang Yi to Rong-pacifying general, and he governed the prefecture as before.

嶷初见费祎为大将军，恣性泛爱，待信新附太过，嶷书戒之曰：“昔岑彭率师，来歙杖节，咸见害于刺客。今明将军位尊权重，宜鉴前事，少以为警。”
张嶷最初感觉费祎作为大将军，对人无所不爱，对待归附的新人太过信赖，就写信劝诫他说：“过去岑彭统帅军队，来歙持符节征讨公孙述，都被刺客暗杀。如今大将军您位尊权重，应该借鉴前人有过的教训，多少有些警觉。”
When Zhang Yi first saw Great General Fei Yi showing his favors profusely and over-trusting the surrendered men, Zhang Yi warned him in a letter, “In the past Cen Peng commanded the army, and Lai She, with the imperial tallies, conquered Gongsun Shu. They were all assassinated by murderers. Today Great General, you are in the high position with great power. You should draw lessons from the past examples and keep alert to some extent.”

后祎果为魏降人郭脩所害。
后来费祎果然被魏国投降过来的人郭脩所害。
Later Fei Yi was murdered by Guo Xiu, a surrenderer from the Wei Empire.

吴太傅诸葛恪以初破魏军，大兴兵众以图攻取。
吴国太傅诸葛恪因为刚打败了魏国军队，就大举兴兵图谋进攻中原。
Zhuge Ke, the imperial assistant of the Wu Empire, defeated the Wei Army for the first time, and after it, he launched a large-scale recruitment of soldiers for the purpose of conquering the Wei. 

侍中诸葛瞻，丞相亮之子，恪从弟也，嶷与书曰：“东主初崩，帝实幼弱，太傅受寄托之重，亦何容易！
侍中诸葛瞻，是蜀丞相诸葛亮的儿子，诸葛恪的堂弟，张嶷给诸葛瞻写信说：“东吴君主孙权刚刚驾崩，即位的皇帝还确实太过幼小，太傅肩负吴大帝的托孤重任，哪是容易之事！
Zhuge Zhan was an imperial attendant, son of the ex-Prime Minister Zhuge Liang, and cousin of Zhuge Ke. Zhang Yi wrote to him, “The emperor of the East Wu demised recently, and the new emperor is too young and weak. The imperial assistant has been entrusted with an important task. How can this be easy!

亲以周公之才，犹有管、蔡流言之变，霍光受任，亦有燕、盖、上官逆乱之谋，赖成、昭之明，以免斯难耳。
至亲之间就如成王的叔叔周公这样有才能的人，尚且还有管叔、蔡叔散布流言酿成祸乱，霍光受遗诏辅政，也发生过燕王旦、盖长公主、上官桀的叛乱图谋，当时纯粹依赖周成王、汉昭帝的英明，才使得他们各自免除临头的大祸。
Even if Duke Zhou, uncle of King Cheng, was talented, there still remained the disaster caused by the rumors of Guanshu and Caishu. When Huo Guang accepted the imperial will to be the regent, he also met the rebellious scheme of Dan, Prince of Yan State, Ge the Eldest Princess and Shangguan Jie. It was the wisdom of King Cheng and Emperor Zhao who prevented the problems.

昔每闻东主杀生赏罚，不任下人，又今以垂没之命，卒召太傅，属以后事，诚实可虑。
过去曾听说吴主孙权一手主宰生死赏罚，不由底下官僚依法裁决，而今又是在将死之际，仓促召见太傅，以身后大事嘱托，对此确实应有所深思熟虑。
In the past, I once heard that the emperor of the East Wu made decisions by himself on reward or punishment without consulting any subordinates. He summoned the imperial assistant suddenly on his death bed and trusted him with the will. The imperial assistant should have considered it carefully.

加吴、楚剽急，乃昔所记，而太傅离少主，履敌庭，恐非良计长算之术也。
加上吴、楚二地的人性格急躁易怒，这是以前就有的记载，而太傅却远离少主，亲自领兵进入敌国境内，恐怕不是好的办法，更非长久之计。
In addition, people in Wu and Chu are usually hot-tempered, as was often recorded in the past. Now the imperial assistant has left the young emperor in the court, and treads on the enemy’s land. This perhaps is not a good strategy or a long term plan for the country.

虽云东家纲纪肃然，上下辑睦，百有一失，非明者之虑邪？
虽然说东吴的法纪严明，上下和睦，但百有一失，这不是聪明人都应该考虑的吗？
Although it is said that the East Wu has strict laws and disciplines, and the superiors and subordinates are in harmony, there might still be one omission in a hundred. Should a wise man not think it over?

取古则今，今则古也，自非郎君进忠言于太傅，谁复有尽言者也！
用古代的事情审度今天，今天就和古代一样，若不是郎君您向太傅提出忠告，还有谁能把自己心中的思虑对他和盘托出呢！
If we compare today’s affair with the ancient examples, we will know that the current affair is quite the same as the ancient examples. If it is not you who can offer advice to the imperial assistant, is there anyone else who can tell him all these honestly?

旋军广农，务行德惠，数年之中，东西并举，实为不晚，愿深采察。
”太傅不如回师推广农桑，致力于恩德仁惠的施予，几年之内，东吴西蜀一起行动，实在不能算是太晚，希望您深切采纳并慎重考察。”
My suggestion is to withdraw the armies and engage in farming, advocate virtues and give benefits to people. Within a few years, it won’t be late for the East Wu and the West Shu to cooperate in defeating our enemy. I wish you could accept my suggestion and think it over!”

恪竟以此夷族。
诸葛恪最后就因为伐魏之事而被灭族。
Zhuge Ke, in the end, was killed with all his family members and his clan relatives because of this. 

嶷识见多如是类。
张嶷的见识大多都像这样。
Zhang Yi showed his insights more often in such examples.

在郡十五年，邦域安穆。
张嶷任越巂太守长达十五年，境内安定肃穆。
Zhang Yi was the prefect for fifteen years, and the prefecture remained peaceful.

屡乞求还，乃征诣成都。夷民恋慕，扶毂泣涕。
他屡次请求返京，于是受到征召调回成都。汉、夷百姓都恋恋不舍，扶着他的车毂哭泣流泪。
He repeatedly pleaded for return, and finally he was summoned to Chengdu. The people of the minority tribes could not tear themselves away from him, holding the wheels of his carriage in tears.

过旄牛邑，邑君襁负来迎，及追寻至蜀郡界，其督相率随嶷朝贡者百余人。
经过旄牛邑，邑君扶老携幼前来迎接，以至跟随着车驾把他一直送到蜀郡边界，当地的都督带领着一百多人随张嶷到成都朝贡。
When he passed by the town of the Maoniu tribes, the town chief and his people welcomed him with babies in swaddling clothes on their backs. When he reached the boundary of Shu Prefecture, more than a hundred tribal governors followed him to present their tributes in Chengdu.

嶷至成都，拜荡寇将军，慷慨壮烈，士人咸多贵之。
张嶷到成都后，被任命为荡寇将军，为人慷慨壮烈，士人们都很敬重他。
When Zhang Yi arrived in Chengdu, he was appointed as Dangkou General. He was generous and passionate, and was highly respected by the scholars.

然放荡少礼，人亦以此讥焉。
但他行为放荡缺少礼仪，人们也因此讥讽他。
However, he was unrestrained and lacked etiquette, so people also ridiculed him for this. 

是岁延熙十七年也。
这一年是延熙十七年。
This was the seventeenth year of Yanxi.

魏狄道长李简密书请降，卫将军姜维率嶷等因简之资以出陇西。
魏国狄道长李简秘密写信请求归降，卫将军姜维率领张嶷等人借助李简的帮助出兵陇西。
Li Jian, the chief of Di Dao in Wei, secretly wrote to surrender. Wei Jiang, the Wei General, led Zhang Yi and others to march into Longxi with Li Jian’s help.

既到狄道，简悉率城中吏民出迎军。
到了狄道后，李简率领城中全部的官吏百姓出来迎接蜀军。
When they arrived at Di Dao, Li Jian led all the officials and people in the city to welcome the Shu army.

军前与魏将徐质交锋，嶷临陈陨身，然其所杀伤亦过倍。
蜀军前锋与魏将徐质交战，张嶷临阵战死，但他也杀伤了超过成倍的敌人。
The vanguard of the Shu army fought against Xu Zhi, a general of Wei. Zhang Yi died in the battle, but the number of enemies he killed and wounded was more than double.

既亡，封长子瑛西乡侯，次子护雄袭爵。
张嶷死后，蜀国封他的长子张瑛为西乡侯，次子张护雄则承袭父亲的爵位。
With his death, his eldest son Zhang Ying was conferred on the title of Marquis of Xixiang, and his second son, Zhang Huxiong inherited his rank of nobility.

南土越巂民夷闻嶷死，无不悲泣，为嶷立庙，四时水旱辄祀之。
南方越巂郡的汉、夷民众得悉张嶷的死讯，无不悲伤哭泣，他们为张嶷在当地建庙，四时节令和水、旱灾害降临时都对他进行祭祀。
When the Han people and minority tribes in southern Yuexi heard of the death of Zhang Yi, all shed tears. They constructed a temple for Zhang Yi and offered him sacrifices in all four seasons, and whenever flood or drought took place.

