李恢字德昂，建宁俞元人也。
李恢字德昂，建宁郡俞元县人。
Li Hui, also known as De'ang, was a native of Yuyuan in Jianning.

仕郡督邮，姑夫爨习为建伶令，有违法之事，恢正习免官。
曾任郡中的督邮，他的姑夫爨习任建伶县令，有犯法的事情，李恢依法裁定爨习应当免去官职。
He was once a prefectural security inspector. When his aunt’s husband, Cuan Xi, magistrate of Jianling, committed a crime, Li Hui reported his crime and decided upon his dismissal from the office in accordance to the law.

太守董和以习方土大姓，寝而不许。
太守董和认为爨习是当地的大姓，所以压下李恢的提案而没有让爨习免官。
The prefect Dong He withheld the case without permission because Cuan Xi was from a noble family in the area.

后贡恢于州，涉道未至，闻先主自葭萌还攻刘璋。
后来推举李恢去州里任职，还在途中未到，听说刘备从葭萌关南下攻打刘璋。
Later Li Hui was recommended to be an official in the prefectural administration. On the way to take office, he heard that Founding Master went down south from the Jiameng Pass to counterattack Liu Zhang.

恢知璋之必败、先主必成，乃托名郡使，北诣先主，遇于绵竹。
李恢料到刘璋必败而刘备定能成功，于是托名为建宁郡的使者，北上去见刘备，在绵竹相遇。
He knew Liu Zhang was doomed to fail, and Founding Master was sure to succeed, so in the name of a prefectural envoy, he went north to see Founding Master and met him in Mianzhu.

先主嘉之，从至雒城，遣恢至汉中交好马超，超遂从命。
刘备很赞赏他的举措，让李恢跟随到了雒城，然后派他到汉中去结交马超，于是马超归附了刘备。
Founding Master praised him for his action, and had him join the journey to Luocheng. Then he sent him to Hanzhong to make friends with Ma Chao, and consequently Ma Chao attached himself to Founding Master.

成都既定，先主领益州牧，以恢为功曹书佐、主簿。
成都平定后，刘备兼任益州牧，任命李恢为功曹书佐、主簿。
After Chengdu was pacified, Founding Master became the governor of Yi Province, and he appointed Li Hui secretary of the executive vice prefect, and later head secretary.

后为亡虏所诬，引恢谋反，有司执送，先主明其不然，更迁恢为别驾从事。
后来被逃亡的罪人诬告，牵扯李恢到谋反案中，有关部门拘捕了李恢并送交刘备发落，刘备指出李恢不会如此，还额外升迁李恢为别驾从事。
He was once accused of a plotted rebellion by an escaped prisoner, and the relevant department arrested Li Hui and sent him to be judged by Founding Master. Founding Master declared that Li Hui would not do such a thing, and even promoted Li Hui to his head secretary.

章武元年，庲降都督邓方卒，先主问恢：“谁可代者？”
章武元年，庲降都督邓方去世，刘备问李恢说：“谁可以替代邓方？”
In the first year of the Zhangwu Period, Deng Fang, garrison commander of Laixiang, died. Founding Master asked Li Hui, “Who can succeed him?”

恢对曰：“人之才能，各有长短，故孔子曰‘其使人也器之’。且夫明主在上，则臣下尽情，是以西零之役，赵充国曰‘莫若老臣’。臣窃不自量，惟陛下察之。”
李恢回答说：“人的才能，各有长短，所以孔子说‘用人要根据对方的才器而定’。而且大凡圣明的君主在上，那么作臣子的必然竭尽心力，所以西零战役那时，赵充国就自荐说‘没人比得过老臣’。我不自量力，愿陛下明察。”
Li Hui answered, “Men’s capabilities are different, so Confucius said, ‘How a man is used is to depend on his own capability.’ And when the monarch is sagacious, his subjects are sure to exert all their might and abilities. Therefore, in the battle of Xiling, Zhao Chongguo recommended himself by stating, ‘No one can defeat me, an old warrior.’ I will not feign modesty, and I only wish for you to make an examination and decide.”

先主笑曰：“孤之本意，亦已在卿矣。” 遂以恢为庲降都督，使持节领交州刺史，住平夷县。
刘备笑着说：“我的本意，也就是你啊。” 于是任命李恢为庲降都督，使持节兼任交州刺史，治所设在平夷县。Founding Master smiled, “My choice is already made on you.” Thereafter, Li Hui was appointed garrison commander of Laixiang as well as the acting governor of Jiao Province with the royal tallies, and was placed to live in Pingyi County as his official seat.

先主薨，高定恣睢于越嶲，雍闿跋扈于建宁，朱褒反叛于牂牁。
刘备去世后，高定在越巂恣意妄为，雍闿在建宁飞扬跋扈，朱褒则在牂牁郡公然反叛。
After the demise of Founding Master, Gao Ding in Yuexi behaved wantonly. Yong Kai in Jianning was arrogant and domineering, and Zhu Bao rebelled in Xiangke.

丞相亮南征，先由越嶲，而恢案道向建宁。
丞相诸葛亮南征，先从越巂进军，李恢则按照行军路线向建宁进军。
Prime Minister Zhuge Liang went on the south punitive expedition first into Yuexi, and Li Hui went along the roads into Jianning.

诸县大相纠合，围恢军于昆明。
敌人好几个县纠合起来，把李恢包围在昆明。
The people of several counties had a big rally and surrounded Li Hui in Kunming.

时恢众少敌倍，又未得亮声息，绐谓南人曰：“官军粮尽，欲规退还，吾中间久斥乡里，乃今得旋，不能复北，欲还与汝等同计谋，故以诚相告。”
当时李恢的人马少出敌人一倍多，又加上没有得到诸葛亮的消息。他派人哄骗南人说：“官军粮草已尽，正在计划撤退，我等离开家乡很久了，今天才得以返回，也不愿再返回北方，想着要跟你们共谋大事，特此以诚相告。”
At that time, Li Hui’s troops were less than half of the enemies in number and had lost contact with Zhuge Liang. He cheated the southern people by saying, “The official army has run out of food supplies and is planning to return. However, I have left my hometown for too long, and today we can return, but we are not willing to go back to the north. Instead I’d like to plan a rebellion with you, which I tell you in sincerity.”

南人信之，故围守怠缓。
南人信了他的话，所以对李恢的围困和警戒有所松懈。
The southerners believed what he said, and relaxed their siege.

于是恢出击，大破之，追奔逐北，南至槃江，东接牂牁，与亮声势相连。
于是李恢派兵出击，大败敌人，追击败军，向南到了槃江，向东到了牂牁，与诸葛亮的部队相互呼应。
Then Li Hui conducted a counterattack, routed the enemy, and pursued after them to the Pan River in the south. To the east, he established the connection with Zhuge Liang, and coordinated with him, building their strength and momentum.

南土平定，恢军功居多，封汉兴亭侯，加安汉将军。
南土平定之后，李恢的军功最为显著，爵封汉兴亭侯，加官安汉将军。
Li Hui made important contributions in the suppression of the southern rebellions. He was granted the title of Marquis of Xingting and promoted to Han-pacifying general.

后军还，南夷复叛，杀害守将。
后来军队返回，南夷不久又反叛，杀害驻守将领。
After the armies returned, the southern tribes rebelled again and killed the garrison commander.

恢身往扑讨，锄尽恶类，徙其豪帅于成都，赋出叟、濮耕牛战马金银犀革，充继军资，于时费用不乏。
李恢亲自前去征讨，尽灭坏人，并把当地的首领迁到成都。从叟、濮等族中征收耕牛、战马、金、银、犀、革，供应军需，当时这些费用没有缺乏过。
Li Hui himself went to take revenge and, after eliminating the rebels, relocated their powerful leaders to Chengdu. He taxed the Sou and Pu tribes for farm cattle, battle steeds, gold, silver, rhinoceros horns and leather for the military use. For a period of time, there was no lack of income for the army.

建兴七年，以交州属吴，解恢刺史。
建兴七年，因为交州归属了吴国，解除了李恢交州刺史职衔。
In the seventh year of the Jianxing Period, as Jiao Province already belonged to the Wu Kingdom, Li Hui was dismissed from his position as governor.

更领建宁太守，以还居本郡。
改为兼任建宁太守，让李恢回到建宁郡居住。
and reappointed prefect of Jianning to live in his own prefecture.

徙居汉中，九年卒。
后又迁居汉中郡，建兴九年去世。
Later he moved to Hanzhong, and died in the ninth year of the Jianxing Period. 

子遗嗣。
其子李遗继承封爵。
His son Li Yi succeeded to his title.

恢弟子球，羽林右部督，随诸葛瞻拒邓艾，临阵授命，死于绵竹。
李恢弟弟的儿子李球，任羽林右部督，随诸葛瞻迎击邓艾，临阵授命，死在绵竹。
Li Qiu, son of Li Hui’s younger brother and the superintendent of the right detachment of the imperial guard, followed Zhuge Zhan to resist Deng Ai bravely. He was given the order at a critical moment in the battle and died in Mianzhu.