诸葛亮字孔明，琅邪阳都人也。
诸葛亮，字孔明，琅邪郡阳都县人。
Zhuge Liang, also known as Kongming, was a native of Yangdu in Langya Prefecture.

汉司隶校尉诸葛丰后也。
是汉朝司隶校尉诸葛丰的后裔。
He was a descendent of Zhuge Feng who was colonel inspector of officials in the central government of the Han Dynasty.

父珪，字君贡，汉末为太山郡丞。
父亲诸葛珪，字君贡，东汉末年曾任太山郡郡丞。
His father, Zhuge Gui, also known as Jungong, was the vice-prefect of Taishan Prefecture at the end of the Han Dynasty.

亮早孤，从父玄为袁术所署豫章太守，玄将亮及亮弟均之官。
诸葛亮少年丧父，叔父诸葛玄被袁术委任为豫章郡太守，诸葛玄带着诸葛亮和诸葛亮的弟弟诸葛均前去上任。
Zhuge Liang became an orphan in his childhood, and his uncle Zhuge Xuan was appointed to prefect of Yuzhang by Yuan Shu. Zhuge Xuan went to take office with Zhuge Liang and his younger brother Zhuge Jun.

会汉朝更选朱皓代玄。
恰逢东汉朝廷改派朱皓代替诸葛玄。
It just so happened that the Court of the Eastern Han Dynasty appointed Zhu Hao to replace Zhuge Xuan.

玄素与荆州牧刘表有旧，往依之。
诸葛玄一向与荆州牧刘表有些老交情，于是就去投奔刘表。
Zhuge Xuan was an old friend of Liu Biao, governor of Jing Province, and so he turned to him for help.

玄卒，亮躬耕陇亩，好为《梁父吟》。
诸葛玄去世后，诸葛亮亲自耕种田园，喜欢作《梁父吟》。
After the death of Zhuge Xuan, Zhuge Liang dedicated himself to farming and found that he liked to chant the Liangfu Songs.

身长八尺，每自比于管仲、乐毅，时人莫之许也。
诸葛亮身高八尺，自己常跟古代贤相管仲、名将乐毅相比，当时他周围的人都不以为然。
Being an eight-chi-tall man, he often compared himself to Guan Zhong and Yue Yi, but his contemporaries never took it seriously.

惟博陵崔州平、颍川徐庶元直与亮友善，谓为信然。
只有博陵郡的崔州平、颍川郡的徐庶与诸葛亮关系亲善，认为他确实具有那样的才能。
Only Zhuge Liang's friends, Cui Zhouping of Boling, and Xu Shu of Yingchuan, also known as Yuanzhi, trusted him.

时先主屯新野。
当时刘备正屯兵新野。
During this time, Founding Master, Liu Bei, garrisoned his troops at Xinye.

徐庶见先主，先主器之，谓先主曰：“诸葛孔明者，卧龙也，将军岂愿见之乎？”
徐庶去见刘备，刘备对他十分器重，徐庶对刘备说：“诸葛孔明这个人，是条卧龙呀，将军难道不想见见他吗？”
Xu Shu met him and won his respect. Xu Shu said to him, "Zhuge Kongming is a sleeping dragon. General, would you like to see him?"

先主曰：“君与俱来。”
刘备说：“你和他一起来吧。”
Founding Master responded, "You two come together."

庶曰：“此人可就见，不可屈致也。将军宜枉驾顾之。”
徐庶说：“此人只能俯就求见，不能随便将他召来。将军应该屈尊亲自去拜访他。”
In response, Xu Shu advised, "You had better pay a visit to this man. You cannot summon him to see you. It is a good idea for you, General, to pay him a humble visit."

由是先主遂诣亮，凡三往，乃见。
为此刘备亲自去见诸葛亮，前后去了三次，才得以见面。
Because of this suggestion, Founding Master visited Zhuge Liang three times until he was received as his guest.

因屏人曰：“汉室倾颓，奸臣窃命，主上蒙尘。孤不度德量力，欲信大义于天下，而智术浅短，遂用猖獗，至于今日。然志犹未已，君谓计将安出？”
刘备屏退身边的人对诸葛亮说：“汉朝政权日益衰败，奸臣窃取国家大权，皇上逃亡在外而蒙受风尘。我不思量自己德行的厚薄和能力的高低，打算替天下伸张正义，而我因为智谋权术狭隘肤浅，因而使得奸人任意横行，一直到今天这种局面。但我原来的志向仍未泯灭，您认为我该怎么办才好呢？”
Founding Master ordered his followers to retreat, entered Zhuge Liang's house and eagerly requested, "The Han Dynasty is declining, the treacherous officials have usurped the power, and the emperor has a dilemma. I, regardless of the weak power and scanty virtue, want to uphold the great righteousness under heaven. However, my wisdom and tactics fall far short of fulfilling this purpose. The enemies have been even more rampant to this day, but I am still cherishing my ambition. What strategy will you suggest?"

亮答曰：“自董卓已来，豪杰并起，跨州连郡者不可胜数。
诸葛亮答道：“从董卓悖逆作乱以来，天下豪杰纷纷起兵，割据州郡的人不胜枚举。
Zhuge Liang replied, "After Dong Zhuo usurped the court power, so many gallant heroes rose simultaneously to have rallied forces across prefectures and provinces.

曹操比于袁绍，则名微而众寡，然操遂能克绍，以弱为强者，非惟天时，抑亦人谋也。
曹操与袁绍相比，本来名望低微而实力弱小，然而曹操最终战胜袁绍，由弱而变强的原因，并非仅限于天意，或许还在于人为的努力。
In comparison with Yuan Shao, Cao Cao was unknown with a small number of soldiers, but he was able to defeat Yuan Shao in the end. Cao Cao grew so powerful from his original weakness, not only because he seized opportunities in a timely manner, but also because he enjoyed the employment of plentiful human resources.

今操已拥百万之众，挟天子而令诸侯，此诚不可与争锋。
现在曹操已拥有上百万人的大军，挟持天子从而号令四方诸侯，这人确实无法与他一较雌雄。
Now Cao Cao possessed an army of over a million soldiers, controlled the Son of Heaven and commanded all the vassals. Indeed you are not able to compete with him in prowess.

孙权据有江东，已历三世，国险而民附，贤能为之用，此可以为援而不可图也。
孙权占据江东，已经历了三代，国土有险可守并且百姓归附，贤士能人都乐意为他效力，这人可以结盟作为外援而不能谋取其地盘。
Sun Quan possesses the east areas of the Changjiang River, where his government has lasted for three generations, and his state is guarded with natural precipitous drops and dangerous passes. People there attach themselves to it, and the talented and capable people have been put to good use. Therefore, he can only be united as a support; he is not to be attacked.

荆州北据汉、沔，利尽南海，东连吴会，西通巴、蜀，此用武之国，而其主不能守，此殆天所以资将军，将军岂有意乎？
荆州北有汉、沔二水作为屏障，南有南海的丰富资源可以利用，向东与吴郡、会稽郡相连，西与巴、蜀相通，这是便于使用武力的好地方，但它的主人却不懂得如何守住它，这大概是上天特地用来资助将军的，将军是否有夺取荆州的打算呢？
Jing Province possesses the Han and Mian Rivers as natural barriers in the north. It has the natural resources of the south seas for use, adjoins the Wu and Kuaiji Prefectures in the east, and connects the Ba and Shu areas in the west. This is a place that can be taken over with our forces because its possessor cannot guard it. This must be the base given to you, General, by heaven. Do you have the desire to seize it?

益州险塞，沃野千里，天府之土，高祖因之以成帝业。
益州地理崎岖阻塞，有千里沃野，世称天府之国，从前汉高祖就是凭借它成就帝业的。
Yi Province is surrounded with precipitous drops and natural passes, and possesses a thousand li of fertile fields. It is a land of natural granary, and the founding emperor of the Han Dynasty relied on it for his cause of the Great Han Empire.

刘璋暗弱，张鲁在北，民殷国富而不知存恤，智能之士思得明君。
刘璋昏庸懦弱，张鲁则占据北边一角，百姓殷实国家富足但他却不懂得抚慰，那些有智谋与才能的人都希望找到一个贤明的主子。
Liu Zhang is fatuous and cowardly. On one hand, Zhang Lu crouches in the north; on the other hand, Liu Zhang's state is wealthy and people are well-off, but he neither know how to maintain it, nor show solicitude for the welfare of his people. Therefore, intelligent and capable men are longing for a wise monarch.

将军既帝室之胄，信义著于四海，总揽英雄，思贤如渴，若跨有荆、益，保其岩阻，西和诸戎，南抚夷越，外结好孙权，内修政理；
将军既是汉朝皇室的后裔，信用和道义流布四海，又广为延揽天下英雄，求贤若渴，如能占据荆、益二州，扼守险阻，向西连和戎族各部，南面安抚夷越各族，对外与孙权结盟通好，对内修明为政之道；
General, you are a descendent of the imperial family. Your sincerity and righteousness are well-known throughout the land, and you have the strong desire to seek heroes everywhere and recruit capable and intelligent men. If you possess both Jing and Yi Provinces, defend their precipitous and dangerous rocky passes, form harmonious relations with the various Rong minority tribes in the west, show more favors for the Yi and Yue minority tribes in the south, form an alliance with Sun Quan in the diplomatic relationship, and rule with good policy in the domestic affairs, you have a good chance for success.

天下有变，则命一上将将荆州之军以向宛、洛，将军身率益州之众出于秦川，百姓孰敢不箪食壶浆以迎将军者乎？
一旦天下形势发生变化，就派一员上将率荆州军队挺进宛县、洛阳，将军则亲率益州大军出师秦川，百姓谁敢不箪食壶浆来迎接将军呢？
Once there is any change under heaven, you can order a great general to lead the army of Jing Province to Wancheng and Luoyang, and, General, you can in person lead the army of Yi Province out of Qinchuan. How can the common people not greet you General with food and drinks?

诚如是，则霸业可成，汉室可兴矣。”
倘若确能如此，那么称霸诸侯的大业就可以成功，汉朝也就可以复兴了。”
Real as it is, your great desire will be accomplished, and the Han Dynasty will be restored."

先主曰：“善！”
刘备说：“好！”
Founding Master exclaimed, "Excellent!"

于是与亮情好日密。
从此与诸葛亮的情谊越来越深厚。
Since then, he and Zhuge Liang forged an increasingly close relationship.

关羽、张飞等不悦，先主解之曰：“孤之有孔明，犹鱼之有水也。愿诸君勿复言。”
关羽、张飞等人很不高兴，刘备向他们解释说：“我有了孔明，就像鱼儿有了水一样。希望你们不要再多说了。”
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei were not pleased with this development. Founding Master declared, "I have the company of Kongming just as a fish lives in water. I wish you to have no word on this anymore."

羽、飞乃止。
关羽、张飞这才停止不喜欢诸葛亮的言行。
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei thereafter closed discussion on the subject.

刘表长子琦，亦深器亮。
刘表的长子刘琦，也十分器重诸葛亮。
Liu Qi, the eldest son of Liu Biao, had a firm trust in Zhuge Liang.

表受后妻之言，爱少子琮，不悦于琦。
刘表听信后妻的话，偏爱小儿子刘琮，不喜欢刘琦。
Liu Biao, taking in his younger wife's words, favored his youngest son Liu Cong and disliked Liu Qi.

琦每欲与亮谋自安之术，亮辄拒塞，未与处画。
刘琦每每想请诸葛亮赐教保全自己的办法，诸葛亮总是加以拒绝，不替他出谋划策。
Liu Qi tried to seize every chance to consult Zhuge Liang in terms of his own safety. Zhuge Liang refused him each time, and never offered advice.

琦乃将亮游观后园，共上高楼，饮宴之间，令人去梯，因谓亮曰：“今日上不至天，下不至地，言出子口，入于吾耳，可以言未？”
刘琦便在精心策划后引领诸葛亮游览后园，一同登上高楼，饮酒中间，刘琦让人撤走楼梯，然后对诸葛亮说：“如今上不着天，下不着地，话从您口中说出，只进入我的耳里，可以说了吧？”
One day, Liu Qi led Zhuge Liang to sightsee in the back garden, and together they climbed the high building. During the feast in the high building, he had the ladder moved away, and said to Zhuge Liang, "Today we are neither in the sky nor on the ground. Words are spoken only from your mouth into my ears. Can you speak about it or not?"

亮答曰：“君不见申生在内而危，重耳在外而安乎？”
诸葛亮说：“您没看到晋公子申生留在国都而身陷危险，重耳逃亡在外却反而安然无恙么？”
Zhuge Liang reminded him, "Don't you see Shensheng was in danger within the capital, while Chong'er was safe outside the country?"

琦意感悟，阴规出计。
刘琦受到启发，开始暗中策划离开襄阳。
Liu Qi was enlightened and secretly planned to live outside the provincial capital.

会黄祖死，得出，遂为江夏太守。
正好江夏太守黄祖死去，刘琦得以脱身，出任江夏太守。
It happened that Huang Zu died at this time, and the opportunity for Liu Qi to leave his place arose; accordingly he was appointed prefect of Jiangxia.

俄而表卒，琮闻曹公来征，遣使请降。
不久刘表去世，刘琮听说曹操前来征讨，就派使者向曹操请求降服。
Soon after, Liu Biao died. When Liu Cong heard that Lord Cao was coming in for a conquest, he sent an envoy to surrender.

先主在樊闻之，率其众南行，亮与徐庶并从，为曹公所追破，获庶母。
刘备在樊城听到这个消息，连忙率领将士和百姓向南开拔，诸葛亮与徐庶也一道跟随，刘备被曹操追上击败，曹军抓获了徐庶的母亲。
Founding Master received the news in Fancheng, and led his people to move south. Zhuge Liang and Xu Shu were together with him, but they were pursued and defeated by Lord Cao. When Lord Cao caught Xu Shu's mother,

庶辞先主而指其心曰：“本欲与将军共图王霸之业者，以此方寸之地也。今已失老母，方寸乱矣，无益于事，请从此别。”
徐庶向刘备告辞却指着自己的心口说：“我本来想和将军一起谋求霸王大业，靠着内心这块方寸大地方。现在我失去了年迈的母亲，方寸乱了，留下来对您的事业也不会有什么帮助，请允许我自此跟你分别吧。”
Xu Shu had to say farewell to Founding Master, pointing to his heart and saying, "I, from the bottom of my heart, planned to assist you, General, to accomplish the great guest of imperial restoration. However, today my old mother has been caught, and I am very upset. I cannot follow you now, and have to say farewell."

遂诣曹公。
于是就到曹操那里去了。
Afterwards he went to see Lord Cao.

先主至于夏口，亮曰：“事急矣，请奉命求救于孙将军。”
刘备到达夏口，诸葛亮说道：“大事十分危急了，请您下令让我去向孙将军求救。”
Founding Master arrived at Xiakou, and Zhuge Liang pressed him, "It is very urgent, please seek the help of General Sun."

时权拥军在柴桑，观望成败，亮说权曰：“海内大乱，将军起兵据有江东，刘豫州亦收众汉南，与曹操并争天下。
这时孙权正率军驻扎柴桑，从旁观望曹、刘战局的胜负。诸葛亮游说孙权道：“天下大乱，将军起兵占据江东，刘豫州也在汉水以南招集人马，与曹操一同争夺天下。
Right at the time, Sun Quan was holding his army in Chaisang, and watching the result of the pursuit. Zhuge Liang persuaded Sun Quan, "When the turbulence arose in the empire, you, General, started your forces and possessed the east areas of the Changjiang River. Governor Liu of Yu Province also rallied people in the south of the Han River. You both competed with Cao Cao for the empire.

今操芟夷大难，略已平矣，遂破荆州，威震四海。
如今曹操铲除祸变，中原各路英雄已被他基本平定，又顺势南下攻破了荆州，声威震动天下。
Today Cao Cao has basically settled the turbulent situation and eliminated the big troubles. To follow up his victories, he took control of Jing Province and inspired awe throughout the empire.

英雄无所用武，故豫州遁逃至此。
英雄已无用武之地，所以刘豫州才逃到这个地方。
The hero could not find a place to demonstrate his ability, therefore, Governor Liu of Yu Province fled here.

将军量力而处之：若能以吴、越之众与中国抗衡，不如早与之绝；若不能当，何不案兵束甲，北面而事之！
请将军权衡自己的实力以应对当前局势：如能凭借吴越的军队与中原的曹军对抗，不如早点与曹操断绝关系；假如无力抗衡，为什么不放下兵器捆束铠甲，干脆向曹操投降称臣！
General, please handle the situation to the best of your ability. If you can resist the forces of the Central Plains with the troops of Wu and Yue, you'd better cut off your relation with them earlier; if you cannot, then why do you not scatter your army and store away the armors to serve the northern government?

今将军外托服从之名，而内怀犹豫之计，事急而不断，祸至无日矣！”
如今将军表面上说是顺服并遵从曹操，内心深处却迟疑不决，情势危急却不能当机立断，大祸没几天就要临头了啊！”
Now, externally you, General, are still serving the northern government in name, but internally you are hesitating with another preparation. The situation is now in such an urgent state that if you cannot make a decision, disaster will befall within a day!"

权曰：“苟如君言，刘豫州何不遂事之乎？”
孙权说：“假如真像你所说的那样，刘豫州为什么不降服于曹操呢？”
Sun Quan retorted, "Just as you have said, why would Governor Liu of Yu Province not surrender to him?"

亮曰：“田横，齐之壮士耳，犹守义不辱，况刘豫州王室之胄，英才盖世，众士慕仰，若水之归海，若事之不济，此乃天也，安能复为之下乎！”
诸葛亮说：“田横只不过是齐国的一个壮士，尚且能够坚守道义不肯辱没自己，何况刘豫州身为汉朝王室后裔，英才盖世，众人都佩服尊敬他，如同江河流归大海那样，如果功业不能成就，这就只能说是天意了，又怎能再做他曹操的臣下！”
Zhuge Liang replied, "Tian Heng, the staunch hero of Qi State, persevered appropriately in righteousness, and not to mention Governor Liu of Yu Province is a royal descendant! Now, how can he again serve Cao Cao as a subordinate? He is uniquely talented, and has won admiration of all men as water flows to sea. If the undertaking cannot be accomplished, it is the will of heaven."

权勃然曰：“吾不能举全吴之地，十万之众，受制于人。吾计决矣！非刘豫州莫可以当曹操者，然豫州新败之后，安能抗此难乎？”
孙权愤怒得脸上变色说：“我不能拿整个东吴疆土，以总数超过十万的大军，而接受他人的控制。我的决心已经下定了！似乎除了刘豫州就没人能与曹操分庭抗礼的了，可是刘豫州新近才吃了大败仗，他又怎能抗击如此强大的对手呢？”
Sun Quan flew into a rage, "I cannot be under the control of another man when I hold the whole Wu land and a hundred thousand people to take a care of. I have made my decision! Only Governor Liu of Yu Province can intercept the charge of Cao Cao, but after his new defeat, how can we meet the challenge?"

亮曰：“豫州军虽败于长阪，今战士还者及关羽水军精甲万人，刘琦合江夏战士亦不下万人。
诸葛亮说：“刘豫州的兵马虽在长阪战败，但现在失散归来的士卒加上关羽的水军，也还有上万精兵，刘琦整合的江夏士兵也不下一万人。
Zhuge Liang said, "Although Governor Liu's army was newly defeated at Changban, now the returned soldiers and Guan Yu's navy can form together a crack troop of about ten thousand. Liu Qi has rallied the soldiers of Jiangxia which total over ten thousand.

曹操之众，远来疲弊，闻追豫州，轻骑一日一夜行三百余里，此所谓‘强弩之末，势不能穿鲁缟’者也。故兵法忌之，曰‘必蹶上将军’。
曹操的军队，远道而来本就疲惫困顿，听说他们追赶刘豫州的时候，使用轻骑兵一日一夜追赶了三百多里，这就是所谓‘强弩之末，势不能穿鲁缟’的道理。因此兵法十分忌讳这种做法，强调说‘必定会损失上将’。
Cao Cao's armies have come from afar and are exhausted. I heard that when they were pursuing after Governor Liu, the light cavalry ran over three hundred li in one day and one night. This means 'The end of the shot of a strong arrow cannot even pierce through the thin Lu gauze'. Therefore, military tactics forbid such a situation and emphasize that 'It will surely lead to the loss of the top general.'

且北方之人，不习水战；
并且曹操的士兵多为北方人，不习惯水战；
Furthermore, the soldiers from the north are not accustomed to battling on boats and ships.

又荆州之民附操者，逼兵势耳，非心服也。
荆州百姓之所以归附曹操，受到兵威的逼迫罢了，并不是心悦诚服。
Moreover, the people of Jing Province are loyal to Cao Cao only because they are forced by his soldiers to follow him.

今将军诚能命猛将统兵数万，与豫州协规同力，破操军必矣。
现在将军确实能命猛将统率几万兵马，和刘豫州同心协力，就必然能够击败曹操。
Now, if you, General, can head several ten thousand courageous soldiers in coordination with Governor of Yu Province, Cao Cao's army will definitely be defeated.

操军破，必北还，如此则荆、吴之势强，鼎足之形成矣。
曹操大军战败，他必然要撤回北方，这样一来荆州、东吴的势力就会大大增强，三足鼎立的局面也就形成了。
When he fails, Cao Cao will return to the north without doubt. If so, Jing Province and the Wu State will grow strong in power, and the situation of the tripartite separation of the land will be settled.

成败之机，在于今日。”
成功与失败的关键，就在今日此时。”
The success or failure of the opportunity lies in today."

权大悦，即遣周瑜、程普、鲁肃等水军三万，随亮诣先主，并力拒曹公。
孙权大喜，当即派周瑜、程普、鲁肃等人率水军三万人，随诸葛亮去见刘备，合力抗击曹操。
Sun Quan was greatly pleased and immediately dispatched Zhou Yu, Chen Pu, Lu Su and many others to lead a navy of thirty thousand soldiers. Together with Zhuge Liang, they reported to Founding Master, and the two armies joined their forces to battle against Lord Cao.

曹公败于赤壁，引军归邺。
曹操在赤壁遭到惨败，领兵撤回邺城。
Lord Cao suffered a defeat at Chibi and withdrew his army back to Ye.

先主遂收江南，以亮为军师中郎将，使督零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，调其赋税，以充军实。
刘备于是乘机收复了江南各郡，任命诸葛亮为军师中郎将，让他都督零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，征调三郡赋税，以便充实军用器械和粮饷。
Founding Master immediately captured the areas south of the Changjiang River. He appointed Zhuge Liang as the military advisor, general of General Office of the Court Affairs, and superintendent of the three prefectures of Lingling, Guiyang and Changsha. His job was to collect supplies and taxes for the army's consumption.

建安十六年，益州牧刘璋遣法正迎先主，使击张鲁。
汉献帝建安十六年，益州牧刘璋遣法正来迎接刘备，让他去攻打张鲁。
In the sixteenth year of the Jian'an Period, Liu Zhang, Governor of Yi Province, sent Fa Zheng to meet Founding Master and asked him to attack Zhang Lu.

亮与关羽镇荆州。先主自葭萌还攻璋，亮与张飞、赵云等率众溯江，分定郡县，与先主共围成都。
诸葛亮与关羽镇守荆州。后来刘备从葭萌回击刘璋，诸葛亮与张飞、赵云等人率军沿长江逆流而上，分别平定了沿江各郡县，然后与刘备一同围困成都。
Zhuge Liang and Guan Yu defended Jing Province. Later, Founding Master counterattacked Liu Zhang from Jiameng. Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei, Zhao Yun, and others led their armies to row upstream, taking control of the prefectures and counties one by one along the Changjiang River. Then together with Founding Master, they laid siege to Chengdu.

成都平，以亮为军师将军，署左将军府事。
成都平定后，刘备任命诸葛亮为军师将军，并兼管左将军府事务。
After the takeover of Chengdu, Zhuge Liang was appointed adviser-general and concurrently commander in charge of the affairs of the Left General Headquarters.

先主外出，亮常镇守成都，足食足兵。
刘备外出时，诸葛亮常任留后镇守成都，备足粮草兵员。
When Founding Master was engaged with enemies outside, very often Zhuge Liang guarded Chengdu to guarantee the sufficient supply of food and military forces.

二十六年，群下劝先主称尊号，先主未许，亮说曰：“昔吴汉、耿弇等初劝世祖即帝位，世祖辞让，前后数四，耿纯进言曰，‘天下英雄喁喁，冀有所望。如不从议者，士大夫各归求主，无为从公也。’世祖感纯言深至，遂然诺之。
建安二十六年，众部下敦促刘备称帝，刘备不肯听从，诸葛亮劝刘备说：“从前吴汉、耿弇等人最初劝世祖光武皇帝称帝，世祖也推辞不肯，先后推让了四次，耿纯为此进言说，‘天下的英雄们对您仰望期待，是想得到想望的东西。您不依从众人的建议，士大夫们就将各自离去另投新主，没有办法使大家继续追随您了。’世祖觉得耿纯的话恳切深刻，于是应允了众人所请。
In the twenty-sixth year, the subordinates persuaded Founding Master to proclaim himself emperor, but he did not give his consent. Zhuge Liang offered his advice, "When Wu Han, Geng Yan and others at first persuaded Hereditary Ancestor of the Eastern Han Dynasty to ascend the imperial throne, he refused four times altogether. Geng Chun then said to him, 'The heroes under heaven persuade you frequently in the hope of obtaining what they want. If you do not accept their suggestion, the scholar-officials will seek respectively their masters and will not follow you anymore.' Hereditary Ancestor could sense his deep feelings of pure sincerity, and accepted their suggestion.

今曹氏篡汉，天下无主，大王刘氏苗族，绍世而起，今即帝位，乃其宜也。士大夫随大王久勤苦者，亦欲望尺寸之功如纯言耳。
”现在曹丕篡夺了汉朝政权，天下没有君主，大王您是刘氏王朝的嫡系宗裔，承续汉朝世系兴起，现在登上帝位，完全是合宜的事。士大夫们长期追随您不辞艰辛劳苦，正如耿纯所说的那样也是希望建立一些微小的功勋罢了。
”Today, Cao Pi usurped the throne of the Han Dynasty, and there is no emperor under heaven. Great King, you are a descendant of the Liu clan. If you rise and succeed to the throne in a proper event, the scholar-officials who have followed you, the great king, through sufferings and hardships, also harbor the desires of rewards for their deeds just as Geng Chun said."

先主于是即帝位，策亮为丞相曰：“朕遭家不造，奉承大统，兢兢业业，不敢康宁，思靖百姓，惧未能绥。於戏！丞相亮其悉朕意无怠，辅朕之阙，助宣重光，以照明天下，君其勖哉！”
刘备于是即位称帝，册命诸葛亮为丞相说：“我遭遇家室不幸，继承帝业，兢兢业业，不敢奢望安宁，只想安定黎民百姓，但又忧虑达不到使天下和乐的目标。呜呼！丞相诸葛亮请您体察我的心愿而无所倦怠，辅佐我克服缺点，协助我布施天子的恩德福泽，以便使汉室的光辉普照天下，请您努力啊！
”Founding Master then ascended the throne, and appointed Zhuge Liang as prime minister. He said, "I met the disaster of the clan, and today succeed to the great throne. I will work diligently, and dare not enjoy a wealthy or tranquil life. I will think how to bring a peaceful life to people, and I am only worried that I cannot do it well. Ah! Zhuge Liang, my prime minister, you know well that I have never relaxed my efforts, so please assist me to overcome my weaknesses, and help me to extend the grace of the Son of Heaven to all my people in order to illuminate the land under heaven. Please do your best."

亮以丞相录尚书事，假节。
诸葛亮以丞相的身份总理尚书台事务，假以朝廷符节。
Zhuge Liang worked in the position of prime minister, and concurrently supervisor of the Secretariat with provisional imperial tallies. 

张飞卒后，领司隶校尉。
张飞去世，诸葛亮再兼任司隶校尉。
After the death of Zhang Fei,concurrently, he was the colonel-inspector of officials in the capital.

章武三年春，先主于永安病笃，召亮于成都，属以后事，谓亮曰：“君才十倍曹丕，必能安国，终定大事。若嗣子可辅，辅之；如其不才，君可自取。”
章武三年春天，刘备在永安病危，将诸葛亮从成都召来，向他嘱托后事，刘备对诸葛亮说：“你的才智胜过曹丕十倍，一定能安邦定国，最终成就统一天下的大业。如果太子刘禅值得辅佐，就辅佐他；如果他没有才能，您可以取而代之。
”In the spring of the third year of the Zhangwu Period, Founding Master was dying in Yong'an, and summoned Zhuge Liang from Chengdu to trust him with his will. Founding Master said to Zhuge Liang, "You are ten times more talented than Cao Pi. You can defend the empire safely and in the end reunite the country. If my son can be assisted, please assist him; if he is not worth assisting, you can replace him yourself."

亮涕泣曰：“臣敢竭股肱之力，效忠贞之节，继之以死！”
诸葛亮流泪说道：“微臣敢于斗胆承诺将竭尽所能担当辅佐重任，奉献自己忠贞不二的节操，直至死去！”
Zhuge Liang tearfully said, "As your subject, I will do my best to remain loyal and serve him till my death."

先主又为诏敕后主曰：“汝与丞相从事，事之如父。”
刘备又写诏敕令刘禅说：“你与诸葛丞相共掌国事，一定要像侍奉父亲一样侍奉他。”
Founding Master issued the decree to instruct Later Master, and said, "You rule the empire with Prime Minister, and treat him as your father."

建兴元年，封亮武乡侯，开府治事。顷之，又领益州牧。政事无巨细，咸决于亮。
刘禅建兴元年，封诸葛亮为武乡侯，成立府署并选置僚属治理军国大事。不久，又命诸葛亮兼任益州牧。政事无论大小，都由诸葛亮全权裁决。
In the first year of the Jianxing Period, Liu Chan conferred on Zhuge Liang Marquis of Wuxiang, and established the central government for the inception of administration. Soon after, Zhuge Liang was appointed governor of Yi Province. All matters in administration, big or small, were handled and decided in his consideration.

南中诸郡，并皆叛乱，亮以新遭大丧，故未便加兵，且遣使聘吴，因结和亲，遂为与国。
其时南方各郡，全都背叛作乱，因新遭先主大丧，所以没有立即出兵讨伐，并且也派使者访问吴国，与吴国建立亲善友好关系，于是两国成为盟友。
The prefectures in the southern and middle areas were all in a state of rebellion. Owing to the recent death of the monarch, Zhuge Liang thought it inappropriate to undertake any punitive expedition. He sent an envoy to the Wu Kingdom to establish a friendly relationship between the two countries and as a result they formed an alliance.

三年春，亮率众南征，其秋悉平。军资所出，国以富饶，乃治戎讲武，以俟大举。
建兴三年春天，诸葛亮率军南征，到当年秋天即将南方诸郡的叛乱全面平定。军需资费都来自于新平定诸郡，国家因此富饶，于是整顿军队训练士兵，等待时机出兵伐魏。
In the spring of the third year, Zhuge Liang headed the army for a southern expedition, and by autumn, all rebellions had been suppressed. All military expenditures were extracted from the rebellious prefectures, and the government became wealthy. Next, Zhuge Liang reorganized the military forces and trained soldiers for a preparation of conquest of the Wei Empire.

五年，率诸军北驻汉中，临发，上疏曰：“先帝创业未半而中道崩殂，今天下三分，益州疲弊，此诚危急存亡之秋也。
建兴五年，诸葛亮统率诸军北上驻扎汉中，临出发前，他上疏陈述道：“先帝开创的基业还没有来得及完成一半就中途去世了，现在魏、蜀、吴三足鼎立，益州困苦穷乏，这确实称得上生死存亡的危急时刻。
In the fifth year, he led the armies north and garrisoned them in Hanzhong. Before he left Chengdu, he wrote a memorial to the emperor: "Founding Master pioneered the mission of the great empire, but demised regretfully when the mission had yet to be accomplished even halfway. Today, the land under heaven has been divided into three parts, and the army and people in Yi Province are exhausted. This is indeed acrucial moment of life and death.

然侍卫之臣不懈于内，忠志之士忘身于外者，盖追先帝之殊遇，欲报之于陛下也。
然而朝中大臣之所以在内兢兢业业丝毫不敢懈怠，忠诚的将士之所以在前方舍生忘死，这都是为了追念先帝在世时对他们的特殊恩遇，想以此来报答陛下。
The ministers of civil services and guarding forces are unswervingly perseverant at home, and loyal, gallant warriors are sacrificing at the front. That is because they are in commemoration of Founding Master's unusual favor and treatment, and want to express their gratitude by servicing you.

诚宜开张圣听，以光先帝遗德，恢弘志士之气，不宜妄自菲薄，引喻失义，以塞忠谏之路也。
陛下确实应该广泛听取忠言，以便发扬光大先帝留下的美德，振奋志士们的勇气，不应该妄自菲薄，称引比喻丧失原则，以致阻塞臣下忠心规劝的言路。
It is indeed appropriate for you to listen extensively to the loyal suggestions in order to extend the virtue of Founding Master and boost the morale of dedicating soldiers. It is inappropriate to humble yourself and speak metaphorically without any principle to cause the blockade of loyal persuasions and suggestions.

宫中府中，俱为一体，陟罚臧否，不宜异同。
宫廷和丞相府，都是一个整体，赏罚褒贬，不应有什么不同。
The court and the government are an integrated unity. Reward and punishment, and affirmation and negation should be meted out fairly without any difference.

若有作奸犯科及为忠善者，宜付有司论其刑赏，以昭陛下平明之理，不宜偏私，使内外异法也。
如果有作恶犯法或为善尽忠的，应该交给主管官员确定相应的处罚与奖赏，以昭显陛下平正明察的立场，不应该持有偏见私心，使宫内与宫外的法度不一。
If there are criminals and evil doers, or loyal and virtuous people, you should order the relevant government offices to allocate punishments or offer rewards to demonstrate your majesty's brightness and fairness. It is inappropriate to show prejudice to cause discrepancies in treatment between the court and the government.

侍中、侍郎郭攸之、费祎、董允等，此皆良实，志虑忠纯，是以先帝简拔以遗陛下。
侍中、侍郎郭攸之、费祎、董允等人，都忠良信实，思想忠诚纯正，因此先帝选拔他们留给陛下任用。
The imperial attendants and servicemen such as Guo Youzhi, Fei Yi, Dong Yun and others are all honest, sincere, pure, and loyal, and they were specially promoted by Founding Master to service you.

愚以为宫中之事，事无大小，悉以咨之，然后施行，必能裨补阙漏，有所广益。
臣认为宫廷中的事情，无论其大小如何，都应该咨询他们的意见，然后才可实施，如此则一定能够弥补缺失遗漏，增添益处。
I humbly consider that you should consult them about the affairs in the court, big or small, before execution, so as to avoid and compensate for mistakes and omissions, and so as to obtain extensive benefits.

将军向宠，性行淑均，晓畅军事，试用于昔日，先帝称之曰能，是以众议举宠为督。
将军向宠，本性与行为善良公正，精通军事，以前经过试用，先帝称赞他是个有才干的人，因此大家共议而推举他担任中部督。
General Xiang Chong with a kind, temperate personality, possesses a thorough knowledge of military affairs, and was promoted for a trial use in the past. Founding Master praised him as being 'capable', therefore, all recommended him as the military commander.

愚以为营中之事，悉以咨之，必能使行陈和睦，优劣得所。
臣认为军中之事，都应先向他咨询，这样一定能使军旅和睦，存优汰劣得其所宜。
I humbly consider that for all military affairs, please consult him. In this way, it is certain that the military troops can maintain harmony, and this will cause an outstanding to be kept and the mediocre will be eliminated.

亲贤臣，远小人，此先汉所以兴隆也；此后汉所以倾颓也。
亲小人，远贤臣，亲近贤臣，疏远小人，这是前汉得以兴盛的原因；亲近小人，疏远贤臣，这是后汉之所以衰败倾覆的根源。
To keep close relations with the virtuous and talented men and to keep at a distance from the vicious and inferior men, was how the Former Han Dynasty prospered; but keeping a close relation with the vicious and inferior men while distancing the virtuous and talented men, is also why the Later Han Dynasty declined.

先帝在时，每与臣论此事，未尝不叹息痛恨于桓、灵也。
先帝在世之时，经常与臣谈论这些事，没有一次不为桓、灵二帝感到痛心疾首。 When Founding Master was still alive, every time he discussed these things with me, he often sighed painfully for the situations in the reigns of Emperors Huan and Ling.

侍中、尚书、长史、参军，此悉贞良死节之臣，愿陛下亲之信之，则汉室之隆，可计日而待也。
侍中郭攸之、费祎，尚书陈震，长史张裔，参军蒋琬，这些人都是忠正诚信不惜以死报国的贤臣，希望陛下能亲近并信任他们，那么汉室的兴盛，就将是指日可待的了。
These imperial attendants, minister of the Secretariat, chief historian, and military advisor are all loyal and devoted officials, and I wish your majesty to trust and keep close contact with them, so that in this way the prosperity of the Han Dynasty can soon be realized.

“臣本布衣，躬耕于南阳，苟全性命于乱世，不求闻达于诸侯。
“臣本来是一个平民，在南阳亲自耕田种地，只想在乱世中苟且保全性命，并没有想过要在诸侯中扬名显达。"
I, your subject, was a common farmer at the beginning, and engaged myself in farming in Nanyang. At that time, I only wished to stay alive in the turbulent world and never had the desire to be known among the vassals and officials.

先帝不以臣卑鄙，猥自枉屈，三顾臣于草庐之中，咨臣以当世之事，由是感激，遂许先帝以驱驰。
先帝不嫌臣低贱鄙陋，亲自屈驾前往，三次到茅庐中去访问微臣，向臣咨询天下大事。臣因此十分感激，于是答应为先帝奔走效力。
Regardless of my humble status, Founding Master paid three visits to my thatched house, consulted me about the contemporary situations; therefore, I felt grateful and committed myself to following and serving him.

后值倾覆，受任于败军之际，奉命于危难之间，尔来二十有一年矣。
后来遇上军事失利，臣在兵败之时担负了重任，在危难之际接受了使命，从那时到现在已有二十一年了。
Later after the military defeat, I bore the great responsibility at the critical moment, and was trusted with the imperial affairs. As of now, this has endured altogether for twenty-one years.

先帝知臣谨慎，故临崩寄臣以大事也。
先帝了解微臣言行慎重小心，所以在临终前将复兴汉室的大事托付给臣。
Founding Master knew that I was discreet, so before his death he trusted me with the great responsibility.

受命以来，夙夜忧叹，恐托付不效，以伤先帝之明，故五月渡泸，深入不毛。
自从接受命令以来，臣昼夜忧虑叹息，唯恐托付给我的事做得没有成效，以致损害先帝的知人明，所以在五月渡过泸水，深入不毛之地讨伐背叛。
Since I accepted the mission, I have been worried and sighed day and night in fear that my ineffectiveness would bring some undesirable reputation to the wisdom of Founding Master. Therefore, I crossed the Lu River in May and marched the army into the desolate areas.

今南方已定，兵甲已足，当奖率三军，北定中原，庶竭驽钝，攘除奸凶，兴复汉室，还于旧都。
如今南方各郡已经平定，武器军备已准备充足，应当勉励督帅三军，挥戈北上平定中原了。或许能尽自己平庸的才能，铲除奸凶邪恶，复兴汉室，回到旧都洛阳。
Now the rebellions in the south have been suppressed, soldiers and weapons are in good preparation, and the three armies should be rewarded and encouraged to conquer the Central Plains in the north. I will exert all my obtuse wisdom to eliminate those treacherous and ferocious enemies to restore the Han Dynasty and return to the old capital.

此臣所以报先帝而忠陛下之职分也。
这是臣用以报答先帝并向陛下效忠所应尽的职责。
It is my obligation to requite Founding Master with my gratitude and express my loyalty to your majesty."

“至于斟酌损益，进尽忠言，则攸之、祎、允之任也。愿陛下托臣以讨贼兴复之效；不效，则治臣之罪，以告先帝之灵。
“至于权衡政事的轻重得失，向陛下进献忠言，则是郭攸之、费祎、董允的责任。希望陛下将讨伐奸贼复兴汉室的成效交付给臣；没有效果，就请治臣的罪，以告先帝的在天之灵。"
As for weighing balance between important and unimportant matters, putting forward suggestions and persuasions in administration, these are the duties of Guo Youzhi, Fei Yi and Dong Yun. I hope your majesty orders me to shoulder the responsibility of the effective conquest of the enemy and restoration of the empire. 

若无兴德之言，则责攸之、祎、允等之慢，以彰其咎。
如果没有劝勉陛下发扬圣德的忠言，那就应责怪郭攸之、费祎、董允等人怠慢失职，公布他们的过错。
If there is no advice to promote virtue, then blame Guo Youzhi, Fei Yi and Dong Yun for their negligence and make their faults known to all.

陛下亦宜自谋，以咨诹善道，察纳雅言，深追先帝遗诏。
陛下也应当自己谋划，向群臣征询治国的好方法，鉴别采纳正确合理的意见，深深追念先帝遗诏。
Your majesty should also plan for yourself, consult others for good governance methods, select and accept proper advice, and deeply remember Founding Master's will.

臣不胜受恩感激。
微臣蒙受大恩，感激之情难以言表。
I am extremely grateful for the grace I have received.

今当远离，临表涕零，不知所言。
”现在臣就要远离陛下了，奏表未写泪水先已模糊了双眼，不知道自己说了些什么。”
Now I am about to leave far away. As I write this memorial, I am in tears and do not know what I am saying."

遂行，屯于沔阳。
于是，诸葛亮率军出发，在沔阳扎下营寨。
Then he set off and stationed the army in Mianyang.

六年春，扬声由斜谷道取郿，使赵云、邓芝为疑军，据箕谷，
建兴六年春，诸葛亮扬言经斜谷道攻取郿县，并派赵云、邓芝率军疑惑敌人，占据箕谷，
In the spring of the sixth year, Zhuge Liang announced that he would attack Mei County via the Xiegu Road. He sent Zhao Yun and Deng Zhi as a decoy army to occupy Jigu.

魏大将军曹真举众拒之。
魏国大将军曹真率兵迎击。
Cao Zhen, the great general of the Wei Dynasty, led his troops to resist them.

亮身率诸军攻祁山，戎阵整齐，赏罚肃而号令明，
诸葛亮则亲率大军进攻祁山，军容整齐，赏罚严肃而号令分明，
Zhuge Liang personally led the armies to attack Qishan. The military formation was neat, rewards and punishments were strict, and orders were clear.

南安、天水、安定三郡叛魏应亮，关中响震。
南安、天水、安定三郡背叛魏国响应诸葛亮，整个关中地区震惊骚动。
The three prefectures of Nan'an, Tianshui and Anding rebelled against the Wei Dynasty and responded to Zhuge Liang, which shocked the Guanzhong area.

魏明帝西镇长安，命张郃拒亮，
魏明帝曹叡亲自西行坐镇长安，命令张郃率军抵御诸葛亮，
Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty went west to garrison Chang'an and ordered Zhang He to resist Zhuge Liang.

亮使马谡督诸军在前，与郃战于街亭。
诸葛亮派马谡督率诸军前锋，与张郃战于街亭。
Zhuge Liang sent Ma Su to command the vanguard troops to fight Zhang He at Jieting.

谡违亮节度，举动失宜，大为郃所破。
马谡违背了诸葛亮的作战部署，行动失当，被张郃打得大败。
Ma Su violated Zhuge Liang's military arrangements and acted improperly, so he was defeated heavily by Zhang He.

亮拔西县千余家，还于汉中，
诸葛亮迁移西县百姓一千多户，退回汉中，
Zhuge Liang moved more than a thousand households from Xixian County and returned to Hanzhong.

戮谡以谢众。
处死了马谡，以向众人谢罪。
He executed Ma Su to apologize to the people.

上疏曰：“臣以弱才，叨窃非据，亲秉旄钺以厉三军，不能训章明法，
诸葛亮上疏给刘禅说：“臣以微弱的才能，担任了不能胜任的职务，亲自秉持白旄黄钺以激励三军，却不能训导规章，严明法纪，
He wrote a memorial to Liu Chan, saying, "With my modest abilities, I hold an position I am not qualified for. I personally hold the white flag and battle axe to inspire the three armies, but I fail to teach the rules and enforce the laws strictly.

临事而惧，至有街亭违命之阙，箕谷不戒之失，
面临大事惊慌失措，致使发生了街亭违背军令的错误，箕谷戒备不严的过失，
I feel afraid when facing major events, leading to the mistake of disobeying orders at Jieting and the error of not being on guard at Jigu.

咎皆在臣授任无方。
责任都在于微臣用人不当。
The fault lies in my improper appointment of personnel.

臣明不知人，恤事多暗，《春秋》责帅，臣职是当。
臣自知不能识别人才，处理事务多有不明之处，按照《春秋》中责罚主帅的原则，臣应当承担这个责任。
I know I cannot identify talents and handle affairs poorly. According to the principle of punishing the commander in the "Spring and Autumn Annals", I should bear this responsibility.

请自贬三等，以督厥咎。
”请求将自己的官职贬降三级，以责罚自己的过失。”
I request to demote myself three ranks to punish myself for my mistakes.

于是以亮为右将军，行丞相事，所总统如前。
于是刘禅任命诸葛亮为右将军，代理丞相职务，所统领的事务仍和以前一样。
Therefore, Liu Chan appointed Zhuge Liang as the Right General to act as the prime minister, and the affairs he commanded remained the same as before.

冬，亮复出散关，围陈仓，曹真拒之，亮粮尽而还。
建兴六年冬，诸葛亮再次出兵散关，围攻陈仓，魏将曹真率兵抗击，诸葛亮粮草用尽后撤兵而回。
In the winter, Zhuge Liang again went out from the San Pass, and laid a siege to Chencang. Cao Zhen was locked in confrontation with Zhuge Liang until Zhuge Liang's army exhausted their provisions and had to withdraw. 

魏将王双率骑追亮，亮与战，破之，斩双。
魏将王双率骑兵追击诸葛亮，诸葛亮与王双交战，大败魏军，斩王双。
Wang Shuang, a general of the Wei Empire, led his cavalrymen to pursue after Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang fought against him, defeated and beheaded him.

七年，亮遣陈式攻武都、阴平。
建兴七年，诸葛亮派陈式攻打武都、阴平。
In the seventh year, Zhuge Liang dispatched Chen Shi to attack Wudu and Yinping. 

魏雍州刺史郭淮率众欲击式，亮自出至建威，淮退还，遂平二郡。
魏国雍州刺史郭淮率军准备进攻陈式，诸葛亮亲自领兵来到建威，郭淮退回雍州，于是诸葛亮平定武都、阴平二郡。
Guo Huai, governor of Yong Province of the Wei Empire, led his army ready to strike Chen Shi. Zhuge Liang himself headed the army out from Jianwei, and Guo Huai immediately retreated. Afterwards, the two prefectures were taken over.

诏策亮曰：
刘禅下诏册封诸葛亮说：
The emperor sent a written edict to Zhuge Liang in which he stated,

“街亭之役，咎由马谡，而君引愆，深自贬抑，重违君意，听顺所守。
“街亭之战，罪在马谡，而您引咎受过，对于自己的责罚抑制到了极为苛刻的地步，我当时不想违背您的意愿，所以同意您的请求以便成全您的操守。
"The failure in the Jieting Battle was caused by Ma Su. You shouldered the responsibility and degraded yourself in excessive severity quite against my will, but I followed your decision.

前年耀师，馘斩王双；
您上一年率兵展示军威，使魏将王双夺魄授首；
The year before, you demonstrated our military prowess and beheaded Wang Shuang,

今岁爰征，郭淮遁走；
今年再次出征，又迫使郭淮逃命；
and this year, your expedition forced Guo Huai to flee away.

降集氐、羌，兴复二郡，威镇凶暴，功勋显然。
安抚降服了氐、羌各部，平定了武都、阴平二郡，兵威震慑凶残残暴之徒，功勋昭著。
It solicited and forced the surrender of the Di and Qiang tribes, and took back the two prefectures. Your powerful demonstration struck the cruel enemies with awe and won brilliant victories.

方今天下骚扰，元恶未枭，君受大任，干国之重，而久自挹损，非所以光扬洪烈矣。
当今天下动荡喧扰，元凶首恶尚未扫除，您肩负着重责大任，主持国家军政大事，却长期自我贬抑谦退，显然不是发扬光大先帝伟大功业的道理。
Now there is turbulence throughout the land, and the biggest enemy has not yet been eliminated. You bear the great responsibility to direct the imperial and military affairs, but you have degraded yourself for so long. Such is not the way to carry on the great cause of Founding Master.

今复君丞相，君其勿辞。”
现在恢复您的丞相职务，请您不要推辞。”
Now I reinstate you in the post of prime minister. Please do not refuse it."

九年，亮复出祁山，以木牛运，粮尽退军，与魏将张郃交战，射杀张郃。
建兴九年，诸葛亮再次兵出祁山，用木牛作为运输工具，粮草用尽撤军时，与魏将张郃交战，射杀张郃。
In the ninth year, Zhuge Liang led his troops out from Qishan again. He carried the provisions with wooden-ox vehicles and withdrew when the provisions were exhausted. His army fought against Zhang He, the famous general of the Wei Empire, and shot him dead.

十二年春，亮悉大众由斜谷出，以流马运，据武功五丈原，与司马宣王对于渭南。
建兴十二年春，诸葛亮统率全部蜀军从斜谷出征，用流马作为运输工具，凭借武功县的五丈原屯兵，与魏国司马懿在渭河以南对峙。
In the spring of the twelfth year, Zhuge Liang headed the armies out of Xie Valley, and transported all the supplies with wooden-horse vehicles. They were stationed at Wuzhangyuan in Wugong County, opposite to King Xuan of Sima in the south of the Wei River.

亮每患粮不继，使己志不申，是以分兵屯田，为久驻之基。
诸葛亮时常忧虑粮草接济不上，使自己的意愿难以实现，因此分兵开荒屯田，作为长期驻扎的基础。
Every time, Zhuge Liang worried about the shortage of grain supplies, which was the largest hindrance to his military success. Therefore, he assigned a part of his army to grow grains there as a long-term garrison base.

耕者杂于渭滨居民之间，而百姓安堵，军无私焉。
垦荒军人交杂居住在渭水边的百姓之中，而百姓安居如初，士兵们也没有谋求私利的。
The farming soldiers mixed themselves with the common people along the sides of the Wei River. The people there lived peacefully as usual, and the soldiers did not seek private benefits.

相持百余日。其年八月，亮疾病，卒于军，时年五十四。
双方相持一百余天。这年八月，诸葛亮染病，在军中去世，时年五十四岁。
The two armies were confronted with each other for over a hundred days until the eighth lunar month of the year, when Zhuge Liang fell to disease and died in the army at the age of 54.

及军退，宣王案行其营垒处所，曰：“天下奇才也！”
等到蜀军撤走，司马懿逐一巡视蜀军留下的营垒，说道：“诸葛亮真是天下的奇才啊！”
After the withdrawal of the Shu armies, King Xuan inspected their empty camps one by one, and praised the camps by saying, "Zhuge Liang is really a unique talent throughout the land."

亮遗命葬汉中定军山，因山为坟，冢足容棺，敛以时服，不须器物。
诸葛亮遗言要求将自己安葬在汉中的定军山，依山造坟，墓穴能容纳棺材即可，入敛也只穿平时的衣服，不必用其他器物殉葬。
Zhuge Liang ordered in his will to be buried in the Dingjun Mountain in Hanzhong. His tomb was to be dug on the mountainside, with the hole only big enough to hold his coffin. He was put in the coffin wearing only his usual clothes and without any funeral objects.

诏策曰：“惟君体资文武，明睿笃诚，受遗托孤，匡辅朕躬，继绝兴微，志存靖乱；
刘禅下诏策命诸葛亮说：“您天生文武兼备，才干超群，英明多智而又忠厚诚实，接受先帝托孤遗命，给予我尽心竭力的辅佐，继绝世，兴衰微，立志平定天下战乱；
The imperial edict read: "Only you are a man of both civil accomplishments and military exploits, and you are a man of great wisdom and sincerity. You followed the will of Founding Master, assisted the orphan in his throne for the continuity of the interrupted Han Dynasty, and revitalized the declined empire. You were determined to bring an end to the military turbulence under heaven,

爰整六师，无岁不征，神武赫然，威震八荒，将建殊功于季汉，参伊、周之巨勋。
整治六军，没有哪一年不曾出师征讨，英明威武，名声昭著，军威震慑四方，即将为蜀汉建立特殊的功绩，勋业势必比美殷商的伊尹和西周的周公。
were able to reorganize and develop the six armies, and you headed military expeditions every year. You were brilliant and powerful, and inspired awe throughout the whole land with your military might. You made the extraordinary contributions to the Shu Han Dynasty, and your accomplishments can be compared with the great officials of Yi Yin and Duke Zhou.

如何不吊，事临垂克，遘疾陨丧！
为什么如此不幸，在大业即将成功之际，您却染病去世了！
You contracted a disease and passed away when our great cause was on the verge of success. Why are you so unfortunate that you contracted a disease and died where the moment of success for the great case is in the foreseeable future? 

朕用伤悼，肝心若裂。
我为您的逝世哀痛悲伤，肝心欲裂。
I am so grief-stricken that I feel as if my heart and liver are broken. 

夫崇德序功，纪行命谥，所以光昭将来，刊载不朽。
推崇德行评定功勋，记录事迹追封谥号，目的无非是让美好的声名彰明显扬于将来，青史为证，永垂不朽。
The purpose of honoring virtue, ranking merits, recording deeds, and conferring posthumous titles is to make glorious names shine in the future and be recorded immortally.

今使使持节左中郎将杜琼，赠君丞相武乡侯印绶，谥君为忠武侯。魂而有灵，嘉兹宠荣。呜呼哀哉！呜呼哀哉！”
现在特派使持节左中郎将杜琼，赠给您丞相武乡侯的印绶，加谥号为忠武侯。泉下英灵有知，将对此尊宠荣耀备感欣慰。呜呼哀哉！呜呼哀哉！”
Now I send my special envoy Du Qiong, left general of the General Office of the Court Affairs with imperial tallies to bestow on you the seal and honor belt of prime minister and Marquis of Wuxiang, and the posthumous title of Marquis of Loyalty and Military Power. May your soul know this favor and these honors with satisfaction! Woe! What distress this brings! Woe! My sadness overcomes me!"

初，亮自表后主曰：“成都有桑八百株，薄田十五顷，子弟衣食，自有余饶。
当初，诸葛亮曾上表给刘禅说：“臣在成都有桑树八百棵，薄田十五顷，家属子弟的衣食费用已比较宽裕。
Earlier, Zhuge Liang himself wrote a memorial to Later Master and said, "In Chengdu I have eight hundred mulberry trees, fifteen hundred mu of infertile fields, and all the basic necessities that would suffice for the family.

至于臣在外任，无别调度，随身衣食，悉仰于官，不别治生，以长尺寸。
至于臣任职在外，没有别的花费安排，随身的衣食全靠国家供给，不用再经营别的产业，来增加自己的家产积蓄。
As for working outside, I have no extra expense, and all my food and clothes are provided officially. There is no need to increase my wealth by way of other professions.

若臣死之日，不使内有余帛，外有赢财，以负陛下。” 及卒，如其所言。
微臣去世之时，倘若家中不曾有多余的丝帛，外面也没有多余的财产，那就是不敢辜负陛下恩宠的意思了。” 到他去世时，果然与他从前所说的一样。
When I die, I will not allow any extra possession of silk in the family or more wealth outside to show my loyalty to your majesty." When he died, it was indeed as he said.

亮性长于巧思，损益连弩，木牛流马，皆出其意；
诸葛亮天生长于巧思，他曾改进箭矢并射连发的强弩，作为运输工具的木牛流马也出于他的奇思妙想；
Zhuge Liang was talented at ingenious conception. He modified the arrowhead and the continuously-shooting crossbow, and the moving wooden oxen and horses were also created from his designs.

推演兵法，作八陈图，咸得其要云。
他推论演绎兵法，制作八阵图，都很得其中要领。
It was said that he truly understood all the essences in studying warcraft and designing the eight-trigram fighting formation.

亮言教书奏多可观，别为一集。
诸葛亮生前议论、教诲、书信、奏章之类都很值得一读，另编为一集。
Zhuge Liang's speeches, instructions, letters and memorials were didactic, and were later edited into a collection.

景耀六年春，诏为亮立庙于沔阳。
景耀六年春，刘禅下诏在沔阳为诸葛亮建立祠庙。
In the spring of the sixth year of the Jingyao Period, the imperial decree was issued to construct a memorial temple in Mianyang for Zhuge Liang.

秋，魏镇西将军钟会征蜀，至汉川，祭亮之庙，令军士不得于亮墓所左右刍牧樵采。
这年秋天，魏国镇西将军钟会领兵伐蜀，到达汉川时，曾前往诸葛亮祠庙上祭，并下令军中士卒不可在诸葛亮墓附近牧马砍柴。
In the autumn, when West-suppressing General Zhong Hui of the Wei Empire was on his way of subduing the Shu Empire, he paid a visit to the Temple of Zhuge Liang upon his arrival at Hanchuan. He gave order that no soldier was allowed to breed horses or cut wood near the tomb of Zhuge Liang.

亮弟均，官至长水校尉。亮子瞻，嗣爵。
诸葛亮的弟弟诸葛均，官至长水校尉。诸葛亮的儿子诸葛瞻，继承父亲的爵位。Zhuge Liang's younger brother Zhuge Jun was once the garrison colonel of Changshui, and Zhuge Zhan, son of Zhuge Liang, inherited his rank of nobility.

《诸葛氏集》目录：开府作牧第一 权制第二 南征第三
《诸葛氏集》目录：开府作牧第一 权制第二 南征第三
The Contents of The Collected Writings of Zhuge Liang: 1. Establishment of the Prime Minister's Office and Governance the First

北出第四 计算第五 训厉第六
北出第四 计算第五 训厉第六
2. Adaptation to Changes the Second 3. The South Expeditions the Third 4. The North Expeditions the Fourth 5. Military Strategy the Fifth 6. Instructions and Admonitions the Sixth

综核上第七 综核下第八 杂言上第九
综核上第七 综核下第八 杂言上第九
7. Comprehensive Examination (1st Part) the Seventh 8. Comprehensive Examination (2nd Part) the Eighth 9. Miscellany (1st Part) the Ninth

杂言下第十 贵和第十一 兵要第十二
杂言下第十 贵和第十一 兵要第十二
10. Miscellany (2nd Part) the Tenth 11. Importance of Harmony the Eleventh 12. Essentials of Warcraft the Twelfth

传运第十三 与孙权书第十四 与诸葛瑾书第十五
传运第十三 与孙权书第十四 与诸葛瑾书第十五
13. Military Transportation the Thirteenth 14. Letters to Sun Quan the Fourteenth 15. Letters to Zhuge Jin the Fifteenth

与孟达书第十六 废李平第十七 法检上第十八
与孟达书第十六 废李平第十七 法检上第十八
16. Letters to Meng Da the Sixteenth 17. Removal of Li Ping the Seventeenth 18. Discipline Inspection (1st Part) the Eighteenth

法检下第十九 科令上第二十 科令下第二十一
法检下第十九 科令上第二十 科令下第二十一
19. Discipline Inspection (2nd Part) the Nineteenth 20. Laws (1st Part) the Twentieth 21. Laws (2nd Part) the Twenty-first

军令上第二十二 军令中第二十三 军令下第二十四
军令上第二十二 军令中第二十三 军令下第二十四
22. The Military Orders (1st Part) the Twenty-second 23. The Military Orders (2nd Part) the Twenty-third 24. The Military Orders (3rd Part) the Twenty-fourth

右二十四篇，凡十万四千一百一十二字。
以上共二十四篇，总共有十万四千一百一十二字。
Altogether there are 104,112 characters in 24 chapters.

臣寿等言：臣前在著作郎，侍中领中书监济北侯臣荀勖、中书令关内侯臣和峤奏，使臣定故蜀丞相诸葛亮故事。
臣陈寿等人上奏说：臣从前担任著作郎时，侍中兼中书监济北侯荀勖、中书令关内侯和峤上奏陛下，让臣审订原蜀汉丞相诸葛亮的旧事。
Your subjects Chen Shou et al. report: "When I, your subject, was the official in the Writing Department; your subject Xun Xu, imperial attendant, concurrently supervisor of the Court Secretariat and Marquis of Jibei; your subject He Qiao, minister of the Court Secretariat and Marquis of Guannei once wrote a memorial to your majesty to suggest that I, your subject, be given the task to edit the

亮毗佐危国，负阻不宾，然犹存录其言，耻善有遗，诚是大晋光明至德，泽被无疆，自古以来，未之有伦也。
诸葛亮辅佐垂危的蜀国，凭借地形险阻，拒不归服，然而仍旧保留整理了他的言论著作，以美好的言行有所遗漏为耻，这实在是我大晋光明磊落的最高道德，恩泽遍布天下，自古以来，还没有同样可比的举措。
biography of Zhuge Liang, ex-prime minister of the Shu Empire. Zhuge Liang supported the tottering Shu Empire by relying on the precipitous geographic barriers and refusing to surrender. Nevertheless, our court still keeps and edits his speeches and writings, and thinks it a shame to neglect the recording of any good speeches and deeds. This is really the highest upright and honorable virtue of our Great Jin Dynasty, whose grace extends to all the land. Since ancient times, there has never been a similar measure that could be compared with these writings.

亮少有逸群之才，英霸之器，身长八尺，容貌甚伟，时人异焉。
诸葛亮年轻时就已显示了出类拔萃的才华，气概英武雄健，他身高八尺，相貌堂堂，当时的人都认为他非比寻常。
"Zhuge Liang was uniquely talented and promising in his youth, and was eight chi in height with a powerful built. He had an appearance of a great man, and his contemporaries regarded him as extraordinary.

遭汉末扰乱，随叔父玄避难荆州，躬耕于野，不求闻达。
因遭遇汉末动乱，诸葛亮随叔父诸葛玄到荆州避难，亲耕于田野之中，不求闻名显达。
Encountering the turbulence at the end of the Han Dynasty, he followed his uncle Zhuge Xuan to Jing Province to avoid the war. He labored in the fields and did not seek any fame.

时左将军刘备以亮有殊量，乃三顾亮于草庐之中；
当时左将军刘备认为诸葛亮才气特别，因而三次前往诸葛亮的茅庐去拜访他；
Right at this time, Left General Liu Bei thought Zhuge Liang had an unusual capability, and paid him three visits to his thatched house.

亮深谓备雄姿杰出，遂解带写诚，厚相结纳。
诸葛亮也深为刘备杰出不凡的雄姿吸引，于是推心置腹奉献忠诚，深深接纳刘备。
Zhuge Liang believed sincerely that Liu Bei was an outstanding hero. After that he bore his heart, and was devoted to Liu Bei, accepting him in utter sincerity.

及魏武帝南征荆州，刘琮举州委质，而备失势众寡，无立锥之地。
后来魏武帝曹操南征荆州，刘琮献出荆州大地自动投降，刘备顿时陷入四顾渺茫，势单力薄的处境，几乎窘困到毫无立足之地。
When Emperor Wu of the Wei Empire went on the southern expedition to Jing Province, Liu Cong surrendered to him with the whole province. Liu Bei then lost his reliance, and with a small army, he had nowhere to stay.

亮时年二十七，乃建奇策，身使孙权，求援吴会。
诸葛亮当时年仅二十七岁，及时为刘备筹划了一条扭转乾坤的奇谋妙计，并且亲任使节拜见孙权，向东吴求救。
Zhuge Liang, who was 27 then, suggested a rare scheme. He paid a visit to Sun Quan in person as an envoy and asked for assistance of the Wu army.

权既宿服仰备，又睹亮奇雅，甚敬重之，即遣兵三万人以助备。
孙权素来佩服刘备，又见诸葛亮谈吐奇妙儒雅，对他甚为敬重，当即派兵三万援助刘备。
Sun Quan had always admired Liu Bei and deeply respected Zhuge Liang, and so when he saw his unique grace, he dispatched thirty thousand soldiers to support Liu Bei.

备得用与武帝交战，大破其军，乘胜克捷，江南悉平。
刘备借助东吴援兵与魏武帝曹操交战，大败曹军，接着乘胜出击，连打胜仗，长江以南诸州郡均被平定。
Liu Bei used the soldiers to battle against Emperor Wu, and was able to crush his army. To follow up the victory, he brought peace to the areas in the south of the Changjiang River.

后备又西取益州。
之后刘备又西进夺得益州。
Later, Liu Bei conquered Yi Province in the west.

益州既定，以亮为军师将军。
益州平定后，刘备任命诸葛亮为军师将军。
After Yi Province became settled, Zhuge Liang was appointed to adviser-general.

备称尊号，拜亮为丞相，录尚书事。
刘备称帝，又拜诸葛亮为丞相，总理尚书台事务。
When Liu Bei ascended the throne of the Shu Empire, Zhuge Liang was appointed prime minister and supervisor of the Secretariat.

及备殂，亮以丞相辅少主，委以诸事，外连东吴，内平南越，立法施度，整理戎旅，工械技巧，物究其极，科教严明，赏罚必信，无恶不惩，无善不显，至于吏不容奸，人怀自厉，道不拾遗，强不侵弱，风化肃然也。
刘备去世后，诸葛亮以丞相身份辅佐幼主，朝中大小事务都交给他处理。他对外联合东吴，对内平定南越，制定法律制度，整训军队，改进工艺技巧，凡事都探究到极致，法令教化严明，赏罚必定兑现，没有恶行不受到惩罚，没有善行不得到表彰，以至于官吏不敢作恶，人人自我激励，路不拾遗，强不欺弱，社会风气整肃良好。
After Liu Bei passed away, Zhuge Liang, as prime minister, assisted the young ruler and was entrusted with all affairs. Externally, he formed an alliance with Wu; internally, he pacified the southern tribes. He established laws and regulations, reorganized the military, improved craftsmanship and skills, and explored everything to the extreme. Laws and education were strict and clear, rewards and punishments were trustworthy. No evil went unpunished, and no good went unnoticed. As a result, officials did not dare to be corrupt, people were self-motivated, there was no littering on the roads, the strong did not oppress the weak, and the social atmosphere was solemn.

当此之时，亮之素志，进欲龙骧虎视，苞括四海，退欲跨陵边疆，震荡宇内。
在这个时候，诸葛亮的夙愿，进则想如龙虎般雄视天下，统一天下；退则想跨越边疆，震动天下。
At this time, Zhuge Liang's long-cherished wish was to, when advancing, be as powerful as a dragon and a tiger, aiming to unify the world; when retreating, to cross the borders and shake the world.

又自以为无身之日，则未有能蹈涉中原、抗衡上国者，是以用兵不戢，屡耀其武。
又自认为自己去世后，蜀国就没有能进军中原、与强国抗衡的人了，因此不断用兵，屡次炫耀武力。
He also thought that after his death, there would be no one in Shu who could march into the Central Plains and compete with powerful states, so he kept using troops and repeatedly showed his military might.

然亮才，于治戎为长，奇谋为短，理民之干，优于将略。
然而诸葛亮的才能，在整训军队方面是长处，在出奇谋方面是短处，治理百姓的才干，胜过他的军事谋略。
However, Zhuge Liang's talent was strong in training the army, weak in devising strange schemes, and his ability to govern the people was better than his military strategy.

而所与对敌，或值人杰，加众寡不侔，攻守异体，故虽连年动众，未能有克。
而他的对手，有的是杰出人才，再加上兵力众寡不等，攻和守的形势不同，所以虽然连年出兵，却没能取胜。
Moreover, his opponents were sometimes outstanding talents, and in addition, the number of troops was unequal, and the situations of attack and defense were different. Therefore, although he sent troops year after year, he failed to achieve victory.

昔萧何荐韩信，管仲举王子城父，皆忖己之长，未能兼有故也。
从前萧何推荐韩信，管仲推荐王子城父，都是因为考虑到自己的长处，不能同时兼具其他才能的缘故。
In the past, Xiao He recommended Han Xin, and Guan Zhong recommended Wang Zichengfu, all because they considered their own strengths and could not have other talents at the same time.

亮之器能政理，抑亦管、萧之亚匹也，而时之名将无城父、韩信，故使功业陵迟，大义不及邪？
诸葛亮的治国理政才能，或许也与管仲、萧何不相上下，然而当时的名将没有王子城父、韩信那样的人，所以使功业衰落，匡扶汉室的大义不能实现吗？
Zhuge Liang's ability to govern and administer was perhaps on a par with Guan Zhong and Xiao He, but there were no famous generals like Wang Zichengfu and Han Xin at that time, so his achievements declined and the great cause of restoring the Han Dynasty could not be realized?

盖天命有归，不可以智力争也。
大概是天命有所归属，不能用智谋和力量去争夺吧。
Perhaps it was because fate belonged to others, and it could not be contested with wisdom and strength.

青龙二年春，亮帅众出武功，分兵屯田，为久驻之基。
青龙二年春，诸葛亮率领军队出武功，分兵屯田，作为长期驻军的基础。
In the spring of the second year of the Qinglong Period, Zhuge Liang led his army out of Wugong, divided his troops to farm for grain, and established a foundation for long-term garrison.

其秋病卒，黎庶追思，以为口实。
这年秋天诸葛亮病逝，百姓追念他，把他的事迹作为谈话的资料。
In the autumn of that year, he died of illness. The common people remembered him and talked about his deeds. 

至今梁、益之民，咨述亮者，言犹在耳，虽甘棠之咏召公，郑人之歌子产，无以远譬也。
直到现在，梁州、益州的百姓，谈论诸葛亮的话还在耳边，即使是《诗经》中歌颂召公的《甘棠》诗，郑国人歌颂子产的歌谣，也无法与之相比。
Even now, the people of Liang and Yi provinces still talk about Zhuge Liang, and their words are still in their ears. Even the praise of Duke Shao in "Gantang" in the Book of Songs and the songs of the people of Zheng praising Zichan cannot compare with it.

孟轲有云：“以逸道使民，虽劳不怨；以生道杀人，虽死不忿。”
孟轲有句话说：“用让百姓安乐的道理役使百姓，百姓即使劳累也不怨恨；用让百姓生存的道理杀人，百姓即使死去也不愤怒。”
Meng Ke once said, "If you make the people work for the sake of their comfort, they will not resent even if they are tired; if you kill people for the sake of their survival, they will not be angry even if they die."

信矣！
确实如此啊！
This is indeed true!

论者或怪亮文彩不艳，而过于丁宁周至。
评论的人有的责怪诸葛亮的文章辞采不华丽，却过于恳切周到。
Some critics blame Zhuge Liang's writings for not being gorgeous in style but being too earnest and thorough.

臣愚以为咎繇大谟，周公诰命，孔氏言行，莫非丁宁，而有忠恳之效，非流俗之所俊也。
我认为咎繇的《大谟》，周公的诰命，孔子的言行，没有不是恳切周到的，却有忠诚恳切的效果，不是世俗之人所推崇的华丽文风可比的。
I think that the "Da Mo" of Gao Yao, the edicts of Zhou Gong, and the words and deeds of Confucius are all earnest and thorough, but they have the effect of loyalty and sincerity, which is not comparable to the flashy style advocated by the vulgar.

然其声教遗言，皆经事综物，公诚之心，形于文墨，足以知其人之意理，而有补于当世。
然而他的教化言论，都是处理事务、综理万物的，公正忠诚之心，体现在文辞中，足以让人了解他的思想道理，并且对当世有补益。
However, his educational teachings and writings are all about handling affairs and managing things. His sense of fairness and loyalty is reflected in his writings, which is enough to let people understand his ideas and principles and be beneficial to the current age.

伏惟陛下迈踪古圣，荡然无忌，故虽敌国诽谤之言，咸肆其辞而无所革讳，所以明大通之道也。
希望陛下追随古代圣君的足迹，胸怀坦荡无所忌讳，所以即使是敌国的诽谤之言，也都任其发表而不加修改避讳，以此来彰显宽广通达的道理。
I hope that your majesty follows the footsteps of ancient sages, is open-minded and has no taboos. Therefore, even the slanderous words of enemy countries are allowed to be published without modification or 避讳，so as to demonstrate the principle of broad-mindedness and openness.

谨录写上诣著作。
恭敬地抄录好呈送到著作局。臣陈寿诚惶诚恐，叩头叩头，死罪死罪。
I respectfully copy and submit this to the Bureau of Works.

臣寿诚惶诚恐，顿首顿首，死罪死罪。
臣陈寿诚惶诚恐，叩头叩头，死罪死罪。
 I, Chen Shou, am truly terrified, kowtow kowtow, and bear the crime of death.

泰始十年二月一日癸巳，平阳侯相臣陈寿上。
泰始十年二月一日癸巳，平阳侯相臣陈寿呈上。
On the first day of February, the tenth year of Taishi, Gui Si, Chen Shou, Prime Minister of Pingyang Marquis, presents this.

乔字伯松，亮兄瑾之第二子也，本字仲慎。与兄元逊俱有名于时，论者以为乔才不及兄，而性业过之。
诸葛乔字伯松，是诸葛亮兄长诸葛瑾的次子，原来字仲慎。他跟自己的哥哥诸葛恪在当时都很有名望，谈论者认为诸葛乔的才干不如他的哥哥，而性情品格优于诸葛恪。
Zhuge Qiao, alias Bosong, was the second son of Zhuge Jin (elder brother of Zhuge Liang), and he originally named himself Zhongshen. He and his elder brother Zhuge Ke, also known as Yuanxun, were both known to their contemporaries. Some critics thought Zhuge Qiao was not as talented as his brother, but was better than his brother in character and temperament.

初，亮未有子，求乔为嗣，瑾启孙权遣乔来西，亮以乔为己適子，故易其字焉。
最初，诸葛亮没有儿子，请求诸葛瑾将诸葛乔过继给自己，诸葛瑾请示孙权后，让诸葛乔西行来到蜀国，诸葛亮将诸葛乔视为自己的嫡长子，所以为他改了字。
At first, Zhuge Liang had no son and pleaded Qiao to be his son. Zhuge Jin reported it to Sun Quan and then sent Zhuge Qiao to the west. Zhuge Liang treated Zhuge Qiao as his own first son, so he changed his alias.

拜为驸马都尉，随亮至汉中。年二十五，建兴六年卒。
诸葛乔被授官为驸马都尉，随诸葛亮到了汉中。后主建兴六年，诸葛乔去世，年仅二十五岁。
He was appointed captain of Imperial Carriage and Cavalry and followed Zhuge Liang to Hanzhong. He died at the age of 25 in the sixth year of the Jianxing Period.

子攀，官至行护军、翊武将军，亦早卒。
诸葛乔的儿子诸葛攀，官至代理护军、翊武将军，也早年去世。
His son, Zhuge Pan, was once an acting general of imperial guards and war-supporting general, but he also died young.

诸葛恪见诛于吴，子孙皆尽，而亮自有胄裔，故攀还复为瑾后。
后来诸葛恪在东吴遭灭门大祸，子孙被诛杀一尽，而诸葛亮这时已有了嫡亲骨肉，因此诸葛攀仍然恢复成诸葛瑾的后裔继承香火。
Zhuge Ke was killed in the Wu Empire, and his offspring all died. Zhuge Liang had his own children at the time, so Zhuge Pan resumed his status as the descendent of Zhuge Jin.

瞻字思远。建兴十二年，亮出武功，与兄瑾书曰：“瞻今已八岁，而聪慧可爱，嫌其早成，恐不为重器耳。”
诸葛瞻字思远。后主刘禅建兴十二年，诸葛亮出师武功县，他在给哥哥诸葛瑾的信中说：“诸葛瞻如今已经八岁，长得聪明可爱，只是嫌他过早成熟，反而担心他将来难以担当大事罢了。”
Zhuge Zhan’s alias is Siyuan. In the twelfth year of the Jianxing Period, when Zhuge Liang marched his army into Wugong, he wrote to his elder brother Zhuge Jin, "Zhan is eight years old now. He is lovely, intelligent, and only somewhat precocious. I am afraid he will not grow to be somebody."

年十七，尚公主，拜骑都尉。其明年为羽林中郎将，屡迁射声校尉、侍中、尚书、尚书仆射，加军师将军。
诸葛瞻十七岁时，娶公主为妻，担任骑都尉一职。第二年任羽林中郎将，以后节节高升，先后担任射声校尉、侍中、尚书仆射，加衔为军师将军。
At 17, he married a princess, and was appointed cavalry captain. The next year, he became a commander of the imperial guards, and was promoted in succession to sound shooting colonel, imperial attendant, vice minister of the Secretariat, plus adviser-general.

瞻工书画，强识念，蜀人追思亮，咸爱其才敏。
诸葛瞻精通书画，记忆力很强，蜀人怀念诸葛亮，也都喜欢诸葛瞻的才思敏捷。
Zhuge Zhan was an expert of calligraphy and painting, and had a splendid memory. The people in Shu kept memory of Zhuge Liang, therefore, they loved him for his talent and quick wit.

每朝廷有一善政佳事，虽非瞻所建倡，百姓皆传相告曰：“葛侯之所为也。”是以美声溢誉，有过其实。
每当朝廷有一桩好的政事，尽管不是出于诸葛瞻的建议倡导，百姓们仍会互相传告说：“这是葛侯所做的。”因此诸葛瞻的美名受到过分渲染，有些言过其实。
Each time, a beneficial measure or an accomplishment was announced, even though it was not advocated or suggested by Zhuge Zhan, common people still told each other, "It is advocated by Marquis Zhuge." In fact he was over reputed and honored more than he ought to be.

景耀四年，为行都护、卫将军，与辅国大将军南乡侯董厥并平尚书事。
后主刘禅景耀四年，诸葛瞻为代理都护并任卫将军，与辅国大将军、南乡侯董厥共同执掌尚书台政务。
In the fourth year of the Jingyao Period, he was appointed acting general of the imperial guards, defense general and also shared the responsibility of evaluating the work of the Secretariat with Dong Jue, Marquis of Nanxiang, and the great general of Imperial Assistance.

六年冬，魏征西将军邓艾伐蜀，自阴平由景谷道旁入。
景耀六年冬，魏国征西将军邓艾率兵征伐蜀国，从阴平郡穿过景谷道附近山区杀入蜀国腹地。
In the winter of the sixth year, Deng Ai, the west-expedition general of the Wei Empire, thrust his army into the Shu Empire from the mountainous area near the road of Jing Valley in Yinping Prefecture.

瞻督诸军至涪停住，前锋破，退还，住绵竹。
诸葛瞻督率诸军赶到涪县扎营，蜀军先头部队战败，诸葛瞻被迫后撤，屯兵绵竹。
Zhuge Zhan headed the armies to camp in Fu. With the failure of the Shu spearhead troops, Zhuge Zhan was forced to retreat and stationed his troops in Mianzhu.

艾遗书诱瞻曰：“若降者，必表为琅邪王。”瞻怒，斩艾使。
邓艾派人送信诱劝诸葛瞻说：“若肯投降，我一定上表朝廷保举你为琅邪王。”诸葛瞻大怒，斩了邓艾的使者。
Deng Ai sent his envoy with a letter to lure and persuade Zhuge Zhan. It stated:“If you are willing to surrender, I will surely write a memorial to recommend you as King of Langya.” Zhuge Zhan flew into a rage and beheaded the envoy.

遂战，大败，临阵死，时年三十七。
与邓艾交战，蜀军大败，诸葛瞻阵亡，死时年仅三十七岁。
Then the two sides engaged themselves in battle. Zhuge Zhan suffered a devastating defeat and died in the battle at the age of 37.

众皆离散，艾长驱至成都。
诸葛瞻所率蜀军溃败，邓艾长驱直入来到成都。
The Shu armies were routed, and afterwards Deng Ai drove directly into Chengdu.

瞻长子尚，与瞻俱没。次子京及攀子颢等，咸熙元年内移河东。
诸葛瞻的长子诸葛尚，跟诸葛瞻同时战死。次子诸葛京，以及诸葛攀之子诸葛显等人，在魏元帝咸熙元年一同迁往内地的河东郡。
Zhuge Shang, the eldest son of Zhuge Zhan, died in the battle with his father. His second son Zhuge Jing and Zhuge Pan’s son Zhuge Hao and several others were moved inland to Hedong in the first year of the Xianxi Period.

董厥者，丞相亮时为府令史，亮称之曰：“董令史，良士也。吾每与之言，思慎宜适。”
董厥，在诸葛亮做丞相时任丞相府令史，诸葛亮称赞他说：“董令史是位贤能之士，我每次和他交谈，都感到他思考问题谨慎恰当。”
Dong Jue was the head historian in the Prime Minister’s office when Zhuge Liang was the prime minister. Zhuge Liang praised him, “The head historian Dong is an excellent man. Each time I talked to him, he thought prudently and spoke appropriately.”

徙为主簿。亮卒后，稍迁至尚书仆射，代陈祗为尚书令，迁大将军，平台事，而义阳樊建代焉。
董厥后升主簿。诸葛亮去世后，董厥稳步升迁到尚书仆射，代替陈祗为尚书令，之后再升为大将军、平台事，原尚书令一职由义阳人樊建代任。
Later he was promoted as chief secretary. After the death of Zhuge Liang, he was promoted a little higher to be the vice minister of the Secretariat, acting minister of the Secretariat for Chen Zhi, and then he was promoted to great general and evaluator of the Secretariat. Fan Jian of Yiyang replaced him as acting minister of the Secretariat.

延熙十四年，以校尉使吴，值孙权病笃，不自见建。
后主刘禅延熙十四年，樊建以校尉身份出使吴国，正赶上孙权病重，没有亲自接见樊建。
In the fourteenth year of the Yanxi Period, Fan Jian went to visit the Wu Empire with the rank of colonel, but it so happened that Sun Quan was seriously diseased and did not receive him in person.

权问诸葛恪曰：“樊建何如宗预也？”恪对曰：“才识不及预，而雅性过之。”
事后，孙权问诸葛恪：“樊建与宗预高下如何？”诸葛恪答道：“樊建才能识见不及宗预，但本色性情高于后者。”
Later Sun Quan asked Zhuge Ke,“How would you compare Fan Jian and Zong Yu?” Zhuge Ke replied,“He is not as talented and capable as Zong Yu, but he has a better personality.”

后为侍中，守尚书令。
后来樊建担任侍中，仍代尚书令一职。
Later he became an imperial attendant, but he was still concurrently the acting minister of the Secretariat.

自瞻、厥、建统事，姜维常征伐在外，宦人黄皓窃弄机柄，咸共将护，无能匡矫，然建特不与皓和好往来。
自从诸葛瞻、董厥、樊建执掌国事以来，姜维经常征战在外，宦人黄皓乘机窃取权柄，朝中大臣都迁就庇护他，没人肯站出来指斥纠正，而只有樊建一人坚持不与黄皓往来结交。
Since Zhuge Zhan, Dong Jue and Fan Jian were in charge of the administration, and Jiang Wei for long stayed out for expeditions, the eunuch Huang Hao took the opportunity to usurp and sway the court power. All the court officials were excessively accommodating and yielding, and could not rectify his evils, only Fan Jian deliberately did not have a friendly relation with Huang Hao.

蜀破之明年春，厥、建俱诣京都，同为相国参军，其秋并兼散骑常侍，使蜀慰劳。
蜀国被攻破的第二年春天，董厥、樊建都来到了魏国京城，一同担任相国参军，当年秋天又一同兼任了散骑常侍，受命出使蜀地抚慰当地军民。
In the spring of the second year after the fall of the Shu Empire, Dong Jue and Fan Jian both came to the capital and both were appointed military advisors of the prime minister, and in the autumn of the same year, both were promoted as court advisors, and were envoys dispatched to Shu for solicitation.

评曰：诸葛亮之为相国也，抚百姓，示仪轨，约官职，从权制，开诚心，布公道；
评：诸葛亮担任丞相期间，安抚百姓，昭示礼法规矩，简省官职，使政策法令尺度合宜。他开示真心诚意，广布公平之道；
Comment: As prime minister, Zhuge Liang appeased and pacified people, demonstrated rites and rules, restricted the number of official posts, formulated appropriate laws and policies, manifested his sincerity, and treated people with fairness.

尽忠益时者虽仇必赏，犯法怠慢者虽亲必罚，服罪输情者虽重必释，游辞巧饰者虽轻必戮；
凡精忠为国、有益于时局的人，即使是仇敌也必定受到奖赏；玩忽职守、触犯国法的人，即使亲人也必定加以责罚；坦白自首、诚心认错的人，即使罪行很重也必定从宽发落；巧言令色、文过饰非的人，即使罪行轻微也必定严加惩治；
Those who were devoted and brought benefit to the society would be rewarded for certainty, even if one was his enemy; those who were criminals and slighted people, would undoubtedly receive punishment, even if they were his relatives. Those who confessed their crimes, though serious, would be treated with leniency; those who covered their crimes with defensive words, though light, would surely be sentenced to death.

善无微而不赏，恶无纤而不贬；
善事即使微小也无不奖赏，恶行即使轻微也无不贬责；
Any good, even though trivial, would be rewarded; and any evil, even small, would not escape penalty.

庶事精练，物理其本，循名责实，虚伪不齿；
他做事精明干练，处理问题善于从根本入手，他讲求名实相符和言行一致，对虚伪狡诈切齿痛恨；
He was capable and experienced, dealt with problems at their roots, saw reality correspondent to its name, and despised hypocrisy.

终于邦域之内，咸畏而爱之，刑政虽峻而无怨者，以其用心平而劝戒明也。
因此在整个蜀国之内，人们都畏惧而又爱戴他，他推行的刑法政令虽然严厉却没有人对他心怀怨恨，实在是因为他用心公正而且劝诫明确的缘故。
As a result within the Shu Empire, all people loved him in awe. Although his administration techniques and punishment were strict, no one complained about them, because he treated people with impartiality and meted out punishment in clarity.

可谓识治之良才，管、萧之亚匹矣。
诸葛亮可以说是很懂得治国安民的良才了，与管仲、萧何这类杰出的政治家相比也应该相差无几。
He can be regarded as a right talent in imperial administration, and a peer of Guan Zhong and Xiao He.

然连年动众，未能成功，盖应变将略，非其所长欤！
然而他连年用兵，却终究未获成功，大概是临机应变的将帅谋略，说到底并不是他的长处吧！
Nevertheless, he headed expeditions in successive years without success, because it is possible that he was not adept in the strategic flexibility as a military commander.
